"The Prophet's Prayer by Shaykh al-Albānī"



The Prophet's Prayer 

Shaykh Nasiral-dIn al-AlbanI 





Granada Publications 





TRANSLITERATION KEY 


£ 

’(1) 

J 

r (6) 


f 


a, a 

j 

Z 

3 

q U 3 ) 


b 

0* 

s 

il 

k 

O 

t 

lT 

sh 

J 

1 

O 

th (2) 

u* 

s (7) 

f 

m 

c 

j 

J* 

4<8) 

0 

n 

c 

h< 3 ) 


t (9) 

0 

h< 14 > 

c 

kh< 4 > 


z (10 > 


u, u, w 


d 

t 

‘(11) 

lS 

1 , i, y 


dh< 5 > 

i 

gh (12) 




1. A distinctive glottal stop made at the bottom of the throat. 

2. Pronounced like the th in think. 

3. Hard h sound made at the Adam’s apple in the middle of the throat. 

4. Pronounced like ch in Scottish loch. 

5. Pronounced like th in this. 

6 . A slightly trilled r made behind the upper front teeth. 

7. An emphatic r pronounced behind the upper front teeth. 

8. An emphatic d- like sound made by pressing the entire tongue against the upper 
palate. 

9. An emphatic t sound produced behind the front teeth. 

10. An emphatic th sound, like the th in this, made behind the front teeth. 

11. A distinctive Semitic sound made in the middle of the throat and sounding to a 
Western ear more like a vowel than a consonant. 

12. A guttural sound made at the top of the throat resembling the untrilled German 
and French r. 

13. A hard k sound produced at the back of the palate. 

14. This sound is like the English h but has more body. It is made at the very bottom 
of the throat and pronounced at the beginning, middle, and ends of words. 



Letter of Permission 

Usama Hasan, the original translator of Shaykh Muhammad Nasir al-Dln 
al-Albanl’s Sifah Saldh al-Nabi into English as The Prophet’s Prayer Described, 
and Manwar Ali (Abu Muntasir), ceo ofjami'at Ihyaa’ Minhaaj al-Sunnah 
(jimas), the original publishers of the translation, hereby give permission 
to others to republish the work, with minor edits if necessary. All such re¬ 
publication must be on a noncommercial basis, and must acknowledge the 
original translator and publisher. The terms of any commercial republication 
must be discussed with the original publisher, jimas. 


Thank you. 



Editor’s Note 

All praise belongs to Allah, Lord of all the worlds. May peace and blessings 
be upon our Prophet Muhammad, upon his family, his companions and all 
those who follow his guidance until the Day of Judgment. 

References 

I have used the following: O Quran and Sunnah Society of North America 
Website © [-»uv£ id Id I . JjjLil Hi ii* © The Saldh: In the 

Light of the Prophet’s Tradition [Islamic Book Trust: Kuala Lumpur, 2010]. 
The Arabic text of all the supplications was checked with © i'T* J*»l 

tVV .LSjLU H§. 

In some cases, even the reference location for mentioned books was strange 
and thus required editing. One such instance was ‘Abd al-Haqq al-Ishbili’s 
book al-Tahajjud (90/1); this book does not have 90 volumes or parts but 
is a one-volume book. Its complete name was al-Saldh wa al-Tabajjnd and 
the intended reference location was pg. 244. I have tried to edit all such 
occurrences but could not do the same with all references; please double 
check before citing directly. If you find any corrections in this regard, please 
contact me immediately. 


11 


PDF file interactivity 


The footnotes are linked to their markers. Clicking on a footnote marker will 
take you to the footnote. Once there, click on the item number to return to 
the place in the text where the footnote marker was placed. Unfortunately, 
due to technical limitations, the same could be applied to chapter links. This 
is because links to chapters are not unique; a chapter can be linked to from 
multiple locations. This book also comes with pdf bookmarks. The sections 
on the Contents page are also linked, including the appendices. Any sections 
mentioned within the text, including footnotes, are also linked. They too are 
limited with regards to returning to where the link was placed. 

Editorial decisions 

I have chosen American English as the main language. Some Quranic trans¬ 
lation quotations are placed between «guilements» whereas others are given 
as centered block quotations. I did not make this decision myself; I followed 
the style of ©. Arabic text that flows like a normal paragraph is given inden¬ 
tation just like its English counterpart. The abbreviation ah stands for anno 
Hegirae and thus needs to come before the year unlike the term after Hijrab 
which obviously has to come after. 

Appendices 

For the most part, I referenced from When I went through the 

appendices, I found some discrepancies between the sources I had access to 
and the translation. I also found that some lines were not translated from the 
source and that the position of some sentences were different to that found 
in the source. I can think of a couple of reasons: (i) The translator used a 


IV 


different edition of the text; (2) The translator believed that the prose was 
more apt for English. The latter is probably due to the translator’s attempt 
at the illusion mentioned by Anthea Bell, 

All my professional life, I have felt that translators are in the 
business of spinning an illusion—the illusion is that the reader 
is reading not a translation but the real thing. 

I decided to highlight such discrepancies. Tines which I could not find 
in the source are highlighted in maroon. The translator sometimes decided 
to summarize whole paragraphs into lines in the translation. These are also 
highlighted in maroon. Tines that were not translated from the source were 
translated and then placed in the translation and highlighted in blue. Tines 
whose position had changed in the translation are numbered and O high¬ 
lighted in purple. Another number marker is placed where the line is found 
in the reference, like this O. I chose to preserve the translator’s decision to 
move lines as it makes the content flow better. 

I’ve added the numbers to the narrations in the appendices to match with 
the sources. They were missing from both O and ©. I’ve also arranged the 
narrations in Appendix A to follow the order as in the source. Some para¬ 
graphs were turned into numbered lists to make it easier to read and refer¬ 
ence. Others had numbered lists removed to allow for more margin space. 

The author had mentioned that some mosques used to have four mahdrib 
(alcoves). I had heard this before but it was only recently that I was able to 
find an account from Masjid al-Haram. I have added this as Appendix I. 

Sadly, I could not accurately determine some of the references mentioned, 
i.e. usually what occurs after mention of the resource, e.g. Book Name (X/Y/Z) 
The appearance of Z is not consistent; some references have it while others 
don’t. Forgive me for this shortcoming. 


V 


Acknowledgments 

After thanking Allah §S for granting me the ability to complete this project, 
I would like to thank Shaykh Dr. Suhayb Hassan for granting permission to 
use his son’s translation and Ustadh Musa Furber for allowing me to use 
his transliteration table. I would also like to thank my dear friends who 
helped me with various parts of the book: Abu Khuzaymah of Salafi Re¬ 
search Institute (SRI), Birmingham, and Ustadh Sajad and Ustadh Shu'ayb 
of al-Nawawi Institute, Kuala Lumpur, for translating missing lines from 
the original references and providing transliterations for words I found diffi¬ 
cult; Amine Bekkai for his encouragement; Hamzah Peer for going through 
the Quran references; Ilyas Hameed for sponsoring my Creative Cloud sub¬ 
scription, without which I couldn’t have designed the title page easily or used 
Adobe Garamond Pro as the main text typeface; Muaz ElHaj for typing out 
the Arabic and double checking it; and Mohammad Zahid Mateen of Ink 
of Faith for lending me his physical copy of the 10 th Arabic edition of the 
book and for suggesting alternative phrasing of titles and a few paragraphs 
for margin constraints and clarity. May Allah allow the Muslims to bene¬ 
fit from this book so that we can pray as our Prophet commanded us to. 
Amin. 

Mohammad Khalid Hussain 
mohammad.khalid.hussain@gmail.com 
Telegram: KhalidHussain 
Dar al-Ihsan, Malaysia 
i Rabi‘ al-Thanl 1440 


Contents 


BRIEF BIOGRAPHY OF AUTHOR xii 

INTRODUCTION XV 

Compilation of this book xvii 
Methodology of this book xx 

The Imams’ positions if their views contradict the Sunnah xxi 
Endnotes xxxi 

MISCONCEPTIONS CLEARED xlviii 
Misconception One xlviii 
Misconception Two 1 
Misconception Three lvii 
Misconception Four lix 
Endnotes lxiv 

1 FACING THE Ka‘bAH I 

Endnotes 3 

2 STANDING IN PRAYER 5 

2. i The prayer of a sick person in a sitting position 6 
2.2 Prayer on a ship 7 


vi 


vii 


2.3 Sitting and standing in Saldh al-Tabajjnd 7 

2.4 Prayer wearing shoes and the command to do so 8 

2.5 Prayer on the minbar (pulpit) 9 

2.6 The sutrah and the obligation to have one 9 

2.7 What breaks the prayer 11 

2.8 Prohibition of prayer facing graves 11 
Endnotes 12 

3 INTENTION AND OPENING TAKBIR 1 8 

3.1 Raising the hands 19 

3.2 The command to place the right arm on the left 

3.3 To place the hands on the chest 19 

3.4 To look at the place of prostration and humility 
Endnotes 22 

4 OPENING SUPPLICATIONS 1~J 

Endnotes 33 

5 RECITATION 37 

5. i Recitation of one ayah at a time 3 9 

5.2 The necessity of al-Fatihah and its excellence 39 

5.3 The abrogation of recitation behind the Imam in the loud 
prayers 41 

5.4 The obligation to recite in the quiet prayers 42 

5.5 The dmin and the Imam’s saying it loudly 42 

5.6 The recitation after al-Fatihah 43 

5.7 Combining similar surahs and others in one rak'ah 44 

5.8 The permissibility of reciting al-Fatihah only 45 

5.9 Mode of recitation in the five prayers and others 46 


19 

20 


viii 


5.10 Quiet and loud recitation in the Tabajjad prayer 47 

5.11 What he i§ used to recite in the different prayers 48 

5.12 Tartil and making the voice beautiful when reciting 57 

5.13 Correcting the Imam 59 

5.14 Seeking refuge and spitting lightly during prayer in order 
to repel temptation 59 

Endnotes 60 

6 the ruku‘ 80 

6. 1 The rukii ‘ described 81 

6.2 The obligation of being at ease in rukii ‘ 81 

6.3 The adhkar in rukid 82 

6.4 Tengthening the rukii ‘ 84 

6.5 Forbiddance of reciting the Quran in rukii 84 

6.6 Rising from rukii ‘ and what is to be said then 84 

6.7 Tengthening this standing and the obligation to be at ease 
in it 88 

Endnotes 89 

7 the sujud 98 

7.1 Going down into sajdab on the hands 99 

7.2 The sajdab described 99 

7.3 The obligation to be at ease in sujiid 101 

7.4 The adhkar of sujid 101 

7.5 Forbiddance of reciting the Quran in sujud 104 

7.6 Lengthening the sajdab 104 

7.7 Excellence of sajdab 105 

7.8 Sajdab on the ground and on mats 106 

7.9 Rising from sajdab 107 


IX 


7-io To sit muftarishan between the two sajdahs 107 

7.11 Iq‘d between the two sajdahs 107 

7.12 The obligation of being at ease between the two sajdahs 107 

7.13 Lengthening the sitting between the two sajdahs 108 

7.14 The adhkar between the two sajdahs 108 

7.15 The second sajdah 108 

7.16 The sitting of rest 109 

7.17 Supporting oneself with the hands on rising for the next 
rak‘ah 109 

Endnotes no 

8 THE SECOND RAKAH 122 

8. i The obligation of reciting al-Fdtihah in every rak ‘ah 122 
Endnotes 123 

9 THE FIRST TASHAHHUD 1 24 

9. i Moving the finger in tashahhud 125 

9.2 The obligation of the first tashahhud and the validity of sup¬ 
plication during it 126 

9.3 Manner of tashahhud 126 

9.4 Sending prayers on the Prophet 129 

9.5 Notes about sending prayers on the Prophet I 132 

9.6 Du‘d in the first tashahhud 145 

9.7 Standing up for the third, and then the fourth rak‘ah 145 

9.8 Quniit in the five prayers because of a calamity 146 

9.9 Quniit in the Witr Prayer 147 
Endnotes 148 


10 THE LAST TASHAHHUD 1 62 


X 


10. i The obligation of this tasbabbud 162 

10.2 The obligation of sending prayers on the Prophet |§J in this 
tasbabbud 163 

10.3 The obligation to seek refuge from four things before sup¬ 
plicating 163 

10.4 Supplication before taslim and its various types 164 
Endnotes 169 

II THETASLiM 1 74 

11. i The obligation of the taslim 175 
Endnotes 176 


-APPENDICES- 


A WEAKNESS OF NARRATIONS ENDORSING IKHTILAF 178 

B The authentic narration: “You are right in some 

OF IT AND WRONG IN SOME OF IT.” 187 
C The ONE WHO PRAYED BADLY I 89 
D Weakness of the narration about placing the 

HANDS BELOW THE NAVEL 191 

E Weakness of assorted narrations 194 
F Analysis of the narrations regarding the saying 

OF AMIN BY THE IMAM AND THE CONGREGATION 1 99 

G The two rakahs after Witr 207 
H The weakness of narrations mentioning wiping 

THE FACE WITH HANDS AFTER DU A 209 

I Four places of prayer in Masjid al-Haram 214 


J Addendum 217 



Brief Biography of Author 


He was born in the city of Shkoder, then the capital of Albania, in the year 
ah 1332/1914 ce into a poor family. His father Hajj Nuh Najjatl al-Albanl 
had completed Sharfah studies in Istanbul and returned a scholar to Alba¬ 
nia. After Albania was taken over by atheism, the family migrated to Dam¬ 
ascus. In Damascus, Shaykh al-Albani completed his initial education and 
was then taught the Quran, Tajwid, sciences of the Arabic language, Fiqh 
of the Hanafi Madhhab, and further branches of the Din by various shaykhs 
and friends of his father. 

He also learnt from his father the art of clock and watch repair. He became 
highly skilled and famous for it and derived his earnings through it. He began 
to specialize in the field of badith and its related sciences by the age of twenty 
after being influenced by articles in al-Manar magazine. 

He began to work in this field by transcribing al-Hafiz al-‘lraql’s monu¬ 
mental al-Mnghni ‘an haml al-Asfdr fi al-Asfdr fi Takbrij md fi al-Ibyd min 
al-Akhbdr and adding notes to it. 

He delved further into the field of badith and its various branches despite 
discouragement from his father. Furthermore, the books he needed were not 
to be found in his father’s library which was composed mainly of various 
works of Hanafi Fiqh and since he could not afford many of the books he 
required, he would borrow them from the famous library of Damascus, al- 



Brief Biography of Author 


xiii 


Maktabah al-Zahirlyyah, or sometimes from book sellers. 

He became engrossed with the science of hadith to the extent that he 
would sometimes close up his shop and stay in the library for up to twelve 
hours, breaking off his work only for prayer; he would not even leave to eat, 
but would take two light snacks with him. 

Eventually the library authorities granted him a special room for his study 
and a key for access to the library before normal opening time. Often, he 
would remain at work from early morning until after ‘Isha prayer. During 
this time he produced many useful works, many of which are still waiting 
to be printed. 

The Shaykh’s studies of the Prophet’s hadith had a great effect on him 
and resulted in his turning away from blind following of his former mad- 
hhab and instead to accept and act upon the Book and the Sunnah, with 
the understanding of al-Salaf al-Sdlih (the pious predecessors). This natu¬ 
rally meant he was sometimes at variance with some of the local shaykhs 
who blindly followed the Hanafi Madhhab, and likewise with the local Sufi 
Imams and innovators who began to oppose him and incite the common 
people against him by calling him a Wahabi deviant. However, he was en¬ 
couraged by some of the noble Shaykhs of Damascus who urged him to 
continue. Amongst them Shaykh Bahjat al-Bayjar, Shaykh ‘Abd al-Fattah, 
and Tawfiq al-Barzah. 

The Shaykh therefore faced much opposition in his efforts to promote 
Tawhid and the Sunnah but he bore this with patience and perseverance. 
After some time he started giving two weekly classes attended by students 
and university teachers, in which he taught various books of ‘ aqidah , fiqh, 
and usul and hadith sciences. He also began organizing monthly journeys 
for dawah purposes to the various cities of Syria and Jordan. 

After a number of his works appeared in print, the Shaykh was chosen 


Brief Biography of Author 


xiv 


to teach hadith in the new Islamic University of al-Madlnah, Saudi Arabia, 
for three years from ah 1381—1383, during which he was also a member of 
the university’s board. After this, he returned to his former studies and work 
in al-Maktabah al-Zahiriyyah, leaving his shop in the hands of one of his 
brothers. 

He visited various countries for da ‘wah and lectures, amongst them Qatar, 
Egypt, Kuwait, the Emirates, Spain, and England. He was forced to em¬ 
igrate a number of times moving from Syria to Jordan, then Syria again, 
then Beirut, then the Emirates, then again to Amman, Jordan, where he 
resided till his death on 22 Jumada al-Akhirah ah 1420 (2 October 1999). 
His works—mainly in the field of hadith and its sciences—number over a 
hundred. 

His students are many and include many shaykhs of the present day. Amongst 
them Shaykh Hamdl Abd al-Majld al-Salafl, Shaykh Muhammad ‘Id ‘Ab- 
basl, Dr. ‘Umar Sulayman al-Ashqar, Shaykh Muhammad Ibrahim Shaqrah, 
Shaykh Muqbil bin Hadl al-Wadi‘I, Shaykh ‘All Khushshan, Shaykh Muham¬ 
mad Jamil Zayni, Shaykh ‘Abd al-Rahman ‘Abd al-Samad, Shaykh ‘All Hasan 
‘Abd al-Hamld al-Halabl, Shaykh Salim al-Hilall, and Shaykh ‘Abd al-Rahman 
‘Abd al-Khaliq. 

{The Saldh: In the Light of the Prophet’s Tradition [Islamic Book Trust: Kuala 
Lumpur, 2010]). 



Introduction 

In the Name of Allah, the Merciful, the Bestower of Mercy. 

Praise be to Allah, who made prayer compulsory on his slaves and ordered 
them to establish it and perform it well; who linked success and felicity to 
humility in prayer; who made it the criterion to distinguish between Iman 
and Kufi", and who made it a restrainer from shameful and unjust deeds. 

Prayers and peace be upon our Prophet Muhammad, who was addressed 
in the Words of The Exalted: 

And We have sent down to you the Message, that you may 
explain clearly to the people what is sent for them, 

(Quran: al-Nahl 44) 

and who fully carried out this task. The prayer was one of the most impor¬ 
tant things which he explained to the people, verbally and practically, even 
praying on the pulpit once—standing, bowing and prostrating, and then 
saying to them, “I have done this so that you may follow me and learn my 
prayer.” 1 He obligated us to copy him in his prayer, saying, “Pray as you have 
seen me praying.” 2 He also gave the good tidings to whoever prayed like him 
that such a person has a covenant with Allah that He will enter him into the 






XV 


Introduction 


xvi 


Garden, saying, “There are five prayers which Allah, Almighty and Sublime, 
has made compulsory. He who performs ablution well for them, prays them 
at their proper times, and is complete in their bowings, prostrations, and 
humility, has a guarantee from Allah that He will forgive him; but he who 
does not do so, has no guarantee from Allah: if He wishes, He will forgive 
him or if He wishes, He will punish him.” 3 

Prayers and peace be also on his family and his pious and just Compan¬ 
ions, who passed on to us his worship, prayer, sayings and actions |§s, and 
who made these, and these alone, a madbbab and a path for them to follow; 
and also on those who follow in their footsteps and tread their path until the 
Day of Judgment. 

When I finished reading the book of prayer in al-Targbib wa al-Tarbib 
by al-Hafiz al-Mundhiri and teaching it to our brothers four years ago, it 
became clear to us all, the important position of the prayer in Islam; and the 
reward, grace, and respect awaiting those who establish and perform it well; 
and that all this varies, depending on its closeness to the Prophets prayer 
|§. This is what he indicated in his saying, “Verily the slave prays a prayer of 
which nothing is written down for him except a tenth, ninth, eighth, seventh, 
sixth, fifth, quarter, third, or half of it.” 4 Therefore, I reminded the brothers 
that it is not possible for us to perform prayer as it should be performed, or 
even approach that, unless we know the detailed description of the Prophet’s 
prayer |f§, including its essentials, manners, forms, supplications ( du‘a ), and 
remembrances ( adbkdr ), and then we make an effort to put that knowledge 
into practice carefully, for then we could hope that our prayers would re¬ 
strain us from shameful and unjust deeds, and that the reward and blessings 
mentioned in the abaditb would be written for us. 

However, detailed familiarity with all these aspects of prayer is unlikely to 
be achieved by most people nowadays, even many scholars, because of their 


Introduction 


xvn 


limiting themselves to a particular madhhab. But—as anyone concerned 
with assisting in compiling and studying the purified Sunnah knows—in 
every madhhab there are sunan which are not found in other madhahib. 
Moreover, in every madhhab, there are sayings and actions which cannot be 
authentically traced back to the Prophet ;; ; most of these are found in the 
sayings of the later scholars, 5 many of whom we see firmly attributing these 
to the Prophet !*’ This is why th c Muhaddithiin —may Allah reward them 
well—have produced books of takhrij on the famous books of the later schol¬ 
ars, explaining the rank of each hadith given in them: whether e.g. authen¬ 
tic, weak, or fabricated. Examples of these books of takhrij are: al-Indy ah bi 
Ma ‘rifah Ahadith al-Hidayah and al- Turuq wa al- Wasd ’il fi Takhrij Ahadith 
Khuldsah al-Dald’il by Shaykh ‘Abd al-Qadir bin Muhammad al-Qurashl 
al-Hanafi; Nash al-Rdyah li Ahadith al-Hidayah by al-Hafiz al-Zayla‘I, and 
its abridged version al-Dirdyah by al-Hafiz Ibn Hajr al-‘AsqalanI, who also 
wrote al-Talkhis al-Habirfi Takhrij Ahadith al-Rdfi‘i al-Kabir, there are many 
others, naming which will only lengthen this discussion. 7 

Compilation of this book 

Since I had not come across a comprehensive book covering this topic, I felt 
obliged to produce a book which collected together as many features of the 
Prophets prayer |§i from the takbir to the taslim as possible, for the benefit 
of my Muslim brothers who wished to follow the guidance of their Prophet 
in their worship, such that it would be easy for any who truly loved the 
Prophet A to use this book to fulfil his command, “Pray as you have seen 
me praying.” 

Thus I embarked on a difficult task, and researched the relevant ahadith 
from the various sources of hadith, the book in your hands being the end 


Introduction 


xviii 


result of it all. I stipulated on myself that I would only give abaditb which 
had an authentic sanad according to the principles and regulations of the 
science of baditb. I disregarded any baditb which depended on unknown or 
weak narrators, whether it dealt with the outward form, adbkdr, excellence, 
etc. of the prayer. This is because I hold that the authentic abaditb 8 are suf¬ 
ficient, leaving no need for anything weak, for the latter does not amount 
to anything except zann (conjecture, suspicion), and incorrect conjecture at 
that; as The Exalted says: 




...and conjecture is of no use against the truth 

(Quran: al-Najm 28) 


and the Prophet / said, “Beware of suspicion, for truly, suspicion is the 
most false of speech.” 9 Therefore, we cannot worship Allah by acting accord¬ 
ing to inauthentic abaditb. In fact, the Messenger of Allah forbade us 
from this, saying, “Keep away from saying things about me, except what 
you know;” 10 since he has forbidden us from relating weak narrations, it 
goes without saying that it is forbidden to act according to them. 

I have compiled the book as two texts: a main text and a subsidiary text. 
The main text includes the text of abaditb or phrases taken from them, as 
well as appropriate words to string them together to give the book fluency 
from start to finish. I have been careful to preserve the text of each baditb as 
it is found in the books of Sunnah; where a baditb has different wordings, 
I have chosen the version which best fits the fluency but I have brought 
together other wordings thus: “(in one version: ...)” or “(in one narration: 
...)” Only rarely have I given the Companion who narrated the baditb , or 


Introduction 


XIX 


explained in the main text which of the Mttbadditbun have collected each 
baditb, in order to provide easy reading and reference. 

As for the subsidiary text, it is a commentary on the main text. In it I 
have traced the abaditb to their sources, exploring their various versions and 
routes of narration. Along with this, I have commented on their isnad and 
supporting narrations, with authenticating and disparaging remarks on nar¬ 
rators, whether authentic or weak, judged according to the rules of the sci¬ 
ence of baditb. Often, one route of narration has additional words which are 
not found in other routes, so I have inserted these into the original baditb 
in the main text whenever it is possible to do so without destroying the flu¬ 
ency, enclosing the addition in square brackets: [...], usually without stating 
which of the sources were alone in containing that addition. This has been 
done only if the baditb is originally on the authority of the same Companion, 
otherwise I have given it separately, e.g. in the opening supplications. This 
insertion of additional wordings is a tremendous advantage which you will 
not find in many books; Praise be to Allah, by Whose Favor good actions 
are completed. 

Next, I have mentioned in the subsidiary text, the madhahib of the schol¬ 
ars regarding the baditb traced, as well as the evidence and counter-evidence 
for each view, along with the strengths and weaknesses of each argument. We 
have then selected out of that the correct view which we have given in the 
main text. Also in the subsidiary text, we have given some issues for which 
there is no text in the Sunnah, but which require ijtibad, and do not come 
under the title of this book. 

Since the publication of this book with both main and subsidiary texts 
is not feasible right now due to various reasons, we have decided to publish 
only the main text of the book (along with brief footnotes) by Allah’s Will, 
and named it Sifah Saldb al-Nabi |§|, min al-Takbir ild al-Taslim Ka’annaka 


Introduction 


xx 


Tardhd (The Prophet’s Prayer Described, from beginning to end, as though you 
were seeing it). 

I ask Allah to make this work sincerely for His Face, and to help my broth¬ 
ers in faith to benefit from it, for He is The Hearer, The Answerer. 

Methodology of this book 

Since the purpose of this book is to convey the guidance of the Prophet |§s 
regarding prayer, it was elementary that I would not limit myself to a partic¬ 
ular madhhab, for the reasons mentioned previously. Therefore, I would give 
whatever is authentically proved from him f, as has always been the way of 
the Muhaddithin , u whether of old or of the recent past, 12 as the excellent 
saying goes: 

The People of Hadlth are the People of the Messenger, although 
they accompany him not, they are with his every movement. 13 

Thus this book would, in-shd-Alldh, gather whatever is relevant to each 
topic from the various contents of the books of hadith and the books on the 
differences between the madhahib, such that the correct verdicts found in 
this book would not be found totally in any one madhhab. Hence the one 
acting on it, in-shd-Alldh, would be among those whom Allah had guided 
«by His Grace to the Truth concerning that in which they differed, for Allah 
guides whom He wills to a path that is straight.# 14 

When I adopted these principles for myself, i.e. to adhere to the authentic 
Sunnah, and to implement them in this book as well as others, I knew for 
sure that this would not satisfy every group of people or sect; in fact, it would 
result in some, if not most of them, insulting or criticizing me. This does 
not matter to me, for I also know that to please everyone is an unattainable 


Introduction 


xxi 


notion, and that “He who pleases the people by angering Allah, Allah will 
entrust him to the people,” as the Messenger of Allah |§| said. 15 The reward 
is with Allah for the author of the following lines: 

Nor could I ever escape from abuse, 

Even were I in a cave in a rugged mountain; 

For who can escape from the people unharmed, 

Even if he hides behind the eagle’s wings? 

It is enough for me that I believe that this is the most upright way, which 
Allah has commanded the believers to take; which our Prophet Muhammad 
i§. Chief of the Messengers, has explained. This is the path which was trod¬ 
den by the Pious Predecessors: the Companions, their Successors and those 
after them, including the four Imams to whose madbabib the majority of 
Muslims today attribute themselves. All of them were agreed on the obliga¬ 
tion to stick to the Sunnah and to refer to it; to ignore every view contradic¬ 
tory to it, no matter how great the holder or propounder of that view, for the 
status of the Messenger of Allah is far greater, and his example far truer. 
Because of this, I have acted on their guidance, followed in their footsteps 
and carried out their commands to stick to the authentic hadith, even if this 
opposes their view. These commands of theirs have influenced me greatly 
in my perusal of this path, and my rejection of blind taqlid (following of 
opinion). I ask Allah The Exalted to reward them greatly. 

The Imams’ positions if their views contradict the Sunnah 

It would be beneficial if we gave some of these here, for perhaps this will 
admonish or remind those who follow the opinion of the Imams—nay, of 
those far below the Imams in rank—blindly, 16 sticking to their madbabib or 


Introduction 


xxn 


views as if these had descended from the heavens! But Allah, Almighty and 
Sublime, says: 





Follow (O men!) the revelation given to you from your Lord, 
and follow not, as friends and protectors, other than Ffim. Lit¬ 
tle is it you remember of admonition. (Quran: al-A‘raf 3) 


Imam Abu Hamfah 

The first of them is Abu Hanlfah Nu'man bin Thabit, whose companions 
have narrated from him various sayings and diverse warnings, all of them 
leading to one thing: the obligation to accept the baditb, and to give up 
following the opinions of the Imams which contradict it: 

1. “When a baditb is found to be sahib, then that is my madhhab ,” 17 

2. “It is not permitted 18 for anyone to accept our views if they do not 
know from where we got them.” 19 

In one narration, “It is prohibited 20 for someone who does not know 
my evidence to give verdicts 21 on the basis of my words.” 

Another narration adds, “.. .for we are mortals: we say one thing one 
day and take it back the next day.” 

In another narration, “Woe to you, O Ya'qub! 22 Do not write down 
everything you hear from me, for it happens that I hold one opin¬ 
ion today and reject it tomorrow, or hold one opinion tomorrow and 
reject it the day after tomorrow.” 23 


Introduction xxiii 

3. “When I say something contradicting the Book of Allah The Exalted 
or what is narrated from the Messenger |§|, then ignore my saying.” 24 

Imam Malik bin Anas 

As for Imam Malik bin Anas, he said: 

1. “Truly I am only a mortal: I make mistakes (sometimes) and I am 
correct (sometimes). Therefore, look into my opinions: all that agrees 
with the Book and the Sunnah, accept it; and all that does not agree 
with the Book and the Sunnah, ignore it.” 25 

2. “Everyone after the Prophet ■ will have his sayings accepted and 
rejected—not so the Prophet i &.” 26 

3. Ibn Wahb said, “I heard Malik being asked about cleaning between 
the toes during ablution. He said, ‘The people do not have to do that.’ 
I did not approach him until the crowd had lessened, when I said to 
him, ‘We know of a sunnah about that.’ He said, ‘What is that?’ I 
said, ‘Al-Layth bin Sa‘d, Ibn Lahfah, and ‘Amr bin al-Harith narrated 
to us from Yazid bin ‘Amr al-Ma‘afirI from Abu ‘Abd al-Rahman al- 
Hubull from Mustawrid bin Shaddad al-Qurashi who said, “I saw the 
Messenger of Allah |§J rubbing between his toes with his little finger.” ’ 
He said, ‘This hadith is sound; I had not heard of it at all until now.’ 
Afterwards, I heard him being asked about the same thing, on which 
he ordered cleaning between the toes.” 27 

Imam al-Shafi‘l 

As for Imam al-Shafi‘l, the quotations from him are most numerous and 

beautiful, 28 and his followers were the best in sticking to them: 


Introduction 


xxiv 


1. “The sunan of the Messenger of Allah ffe reach, as well as escape, from 

everyone of us. So whenever I voice my opinion, or formulate a prin¬ 
ciple, where something contrary to my view exists on the authority of 
the Messenger of Allah fe, then the correct view is what the Messen¬ 
ger of Allah has said, and it is my view.” 29 

2. “The Muslims are unanimously agreed that if a sunnah of the Messen¬ 
ger of Allah |§J is made clear to someone, it is not permitted 30 for him 
to leave it for the saying of anyone else.” 31 

3. “If you find in my writings something different to the Sunnah of the 
Messenger of Allah , then speak on the basis of the Sunnah of the 
Messenger of Allah |§J, and leave what I have said.” 

In one narration: “...then follow it (the Sunnah), and do not look 
sideways at anyone else’s saying.” 32 

4. “When a hadith is found to be sahih, then that is my madhhabl 33 

5. “You 34 are more knowledgeable about hadith than I, so when a hadith 
is sahih, inform me of it, whether it is from Kufa, Basra, or Syria, so 
that I may take the view of the hadith, as long as it is sahih ” 35 

6. “In every issue where the people of narration find a report from the 
Messenger of Allah to be sahih which is contrary to what I have 
said, then I take my saying back, whether during my life or after my 
death.” 36 

7. “If you see me saying something, and contrary to it is authentically 
reported from the Prophet ; , then know that my intelligence has 
departed.” 37 


Introduction 


xxv 


8. “For everything I say, if there is something authentic from the Prophet 
S§ contrary to my saying, then the haditb of the Prophet comes 
first, so do not follow my opinion.” 38 

9. “Every statement on the authority of the Prophet |§| is also my view, 
even if you do not hear it from me.” 39 

Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal 

Imam Ahmad was the foremost among the Imams in collecting the Sunnah 
and sticking to it, so much so that he even “disliked that a book consisting 
of deductions and opinions be written.” 40 Because of this he said: 

1. “Do not follow my opinion; neither follow the opinion of Malik, 
nor al-Shafi‘I, nor al-Awza‘1, nor al-Thawri, but take from where they 
took.” 41 

In one narration: “Do not copy your Din from anyone of these, but 
whatever comes from the Prophet and his Companions, take it; 
next are their Successors, where a man has choice.” 

Once he said: “Following 42 means that a man follows what comes 
from the Prophet ' and his Companions; after the Successors, he 
has a choice.” 43 

2. “The opinion of al-Awza‘I, the opinion of Malik, the opinion of Abu 
Hanlfah: all of it is opinion, and it is all equal in my eyes. However, 
the proof is in the narrations (from the Prophet and his Compan¬ 
ions) ,” 44 

3. “Whoever rejects a statement of the Messenger of Allah is on the 
brink of destruction.” 45 


Introduction 


xxvi 


These are the clear, lucid sayings of the Imams about sticking to the abd- 
dith and forbidding the following of their opinion without clear-cut evi¬ 
dence, such that mere opinion and interpretation are not acceptable. 

Hence, whoever adhered to whatever of the Sunnah that was proved au¬ 
thentic, even if it opposed some of the Imams’ sayings, he would not be 
conflicting with their madbbab, nor straying from their path; rather, such a 
person would be following all of them and would be grasping the most trust¬ 
worthy handhold, which never breaks. However, this would not be the case 
with the one who abandoned any of the authentic Sunnah simply because it 
contradicted their views; nay, such a person would be being disobedient to 
them and opposing their above mentioned sayings, while Allah says: 



But no, by Your Lord, they can have no (real) faith, until they 
make you judge in all disputes between them, and find in their 
souls no resistance against your decisions, but accept them with 
the fullest conviction. (Quran: al-Nisa 65) 

He also says: 

■i •? 

9 1'“' 9 I 9 s' 







Introduction 


xxvii 


Then let those who withstand the Messenger’s order beware, 
lest some trial befall them or a grievous penalty be inflicted on 
them. (Quran: al-Nur 63) 

Al-Hafiz Ibn Rajab al-Hanball says: 

Therefore it is obligatory on anyone who hears of a command 
of the Messenger of Allah or knows it, to explain it to the 
Ummah, advise them sincerely, and order them to follow his 
command, even if it contradicts the opinion of someone great. 

This is because the authority of the Messenger of Allah £§j has 
the most right to be respected and followed, over and above the 
opinion of anyone great who has unknowingly contradicted the 
Messenger’s command in any matter. This is why the Compan¬ 
ions and those after would refute anyone who contradicted the 
authentic Sunnah, sometimes being stern in their refutation, 46 
not out of hatred for that person, for they loved and respected 
him, but because the Messenger of Allah was more beloved to 
them, and his command was superior to the command of any 
other created being. Hence, when the order of the Messenger 
and that of someone else conflicted, the order of the Messen¬ 
ger would be more fitting to be enforced and followed. None of 
this would stop them respecting the person they had opposed 
because they knew that he would be forgiven; 47 in fact, the lat¬ 
ter would not mind his instruction being opposed when the 
command of the Messenger of Allah was clearly shown to 
be opposite. 48 

Indeed, how could they mind that, when they had ordered their followers 
to do so, as we have seen, and had enjoined on them to abandon any of 


Introduction xxviii 

their views which contradicted the Sunnah. In fact, Imam al-Shafi‘I told 
his companions to attribute the authentic Sunnah to him, even if he had 
not adopted it or had adopted something contradictory to it. Hence, when 
the analyst Ibn Daqlq al-‘Eyd collected together, in a bulky volume, the 
issues in which one or more of the four Imams’ madbabib had contradicted 
the authentic badith, he wrote at the beginning of it, “It is prohibited to 
attribute these answers to the Mujtabid Imams, and obligatory on the jurists 
who follow their opinions to know of these so that they do not quote them 
regarding these and thus lie against them.” 49 

Following authentic ahadlth over an Imams saying 

Due to all that we have mentioned, the disciples of the Imams, «a number of 
people from those of old, and a few from those of later time,» 50 would not 
accept all of their Imam’s views; they actually ignored many when they found 
them to be clearly against the Sunnah. Even the two Imams, Muhammad bin 
al-Hasan and Abu Yusuf differed from their sbaykb, Abu Hanlfah “in about 
a third of the Madbbab ,” 51 as the books of masd’il prove. Similarly is said 
about Imam al-Muzanl 52 and other followers of al-Shafi‘I and other Imams; 
were we to start giving examples, the discussion would become exceedingly 
long, and we would digress from what we set out to do in this Introduction, 
so we shall limit ourselves to two instances: 

1. Imam Muhammad says in his Muwattd 53 (p. 158), “As for Abu Hanl¬ 
fah, he did not regard there being a prayer to ask for rain, but we hold 
that the Imam prays two rak'abs and then supplicates and holds out 
his wrapping garment...” 

2. We have ‘Isam bin Yusuf al-Balkhl, one of the companions of Imam 
Muhammad 54 and a servant of Imam Abu Yusuf, 55 who “would give 


Introduction 


xxix 


verdicts contrary to Imam Abu Hanlfah because he did not know the 
latter’s evidence, and other evidence would present itself to him, so he 
would give verdicts using that.” 56 Hence, “he would raise his hands on 
bowing (in prayer) and on rising from it,” 57 as is the mutawdtir sunnah 
of the Prophet 8§; the fact that his three Imams (i.e. Abu Hanlfah, 
Abu Yusuf, and Muhammad) said otherwise did not prevent him from 
practicing this sunnah. This is the approach which every Muslim is 
obliged to have, as we have already seen from the testimony of the 
Four Imams, and others. 


To sum up: I sincerely hope that no follower of an Imam will race to 
condemn the principles of this book and abandon benefiting from the sunan 
of the Prophet which it contains, with the argument that they are contrary 
to his madhhab. I hope that such a person will instead consider what we have 
given of the exhortations of the Imams towards the obligation to act on the 
Sunnah and ignore their sayings contradictory to it. I also hope that he will 
realize that to condemn the attitude of this book is to condemn whichever 
Imam he is following, for we have taken these principles from those Imams, 
as we have explained. Therefore, whoever refuses to be guided by them on 
this path is in great danger, for such refusal necessitates turning away from 
the Sunnah; the Sunnah to which we have been ordered to refer in cases of 
difference of opinion and on which we have been commanded to depend. 

I ask Allah to make us among those about whom He says, 


(|b \ 


Introduction 


xxx 


The answer of the believers, when summoned to Allah and His 
Messenger, in order that he may judge between them, is no 
other than this: they say, “We hear and we obey”—it is such 
as these that will attain Success. It is those who obey Allah and 
His Messenger, and fear Allah, and keep their duty to Him, 
who will triumph. (Quran: al-Nur 51—52) 



Endnotes 

1. Al-Bukhari and Muslim—it will later follow in full. 

2. Al-Bukhari and Ahmad. 

3. Malik, Abu Dawud, al-Nasal, and Ibn Hibban. A sahib baditb, de¬ 
clared sahib by several Imams. I have given its takbrij in Sahib Abi 
Dawud (#451, #1276). 

4. Sahib —collected by Ibn al-Mubarak in al-Zuhd (10/21/1-2), Abu 
Dawud, and al-Nasa I with a good sanad\ I have given its takbrij in 
Sahib Abi Daw fid (#761). 

5. Abu al-Hasanat al-LaknawI says in al-Ndfi‘ al-Kabir liman yutdli al- 
Jdmi al-Sagbir (pp. 122-123), after ranking the books of Hanafl fiqh 
and saying which of them are dependable and which are not: “All that 
we have said about the relative grades of these compilations is related 
to their content of fiqh issues; however, as for their content with re¬ 
gards to abdditb of the Prophet ., then it does not apply, for many 
books on which the cream of the fuqabd rely are full of fabricated abd- 
ditb, let alone rulings of the scholars. It is clear to us from a broad 
analysis that although their authors were otherwise competent, they 
were careless in their quotation of narrations.” 


xxxi 


Introduction 


xxxii 


One of these false, fabricated ahadith which are found in some of 
the best books is: “He who offers the compulsory prayers on the last 
Friday of Ramadan, will make up for every prayer he missed during 
his life up to the age of seventy years!” Al-Laknawl says in al-Athdr al- 
Marfu ‘ah fi al-Akhbdr al-Mawdu ‘ah (p. 315), after giving this hadith, 
‘“All al-Qarl says in his al-Mawdidat al-Sughrdh and al-Kubra: this is 
totally false, for it contradicts the ijmd‘ (consensus) that one act of 
worship cannot make up for those missed over years. Hence, there 
is no point in quoting the author of al-Nihdyah nor the rest of the 
commentators on al-Hidayah, for they are not scholars of hadith, nor 
did they reference this hadith to any of the collectors of hadith I 

Imam al-Shawkanl also mentioned this hadith in al-Fawd ’id al-Maj- 
muah fi al-Ahadith al-Mawdii‘ah with a similar wording and then 
said (p. 54), “This is fabricated beyond doubt—I do not even find 
it in any of the compilations of fabricated ahadithl However, it has 
become popular among some students of fiqh in the city of San‘a in 
this age of ours, and many of them have started acting according to 
it. I do not know who has fabricated it for them—May Allah disgrace 
the liars.” 

Furthermore, al-LaknawI says, “To establish that this hadith —found 
in books of rituals and formulas—is fabricated, I have composed a 
brief essay, with intellectual and narrated evidence, called Defending 
the Brethren from the Innovations of the Last Friday of Ramadan, in 
which I have filed points which will enlighten minds and to which 
ears will hearken, so consult it, for it is valuable in this topic and of 
high quality.” 

The occurrence of similar false ahadith in the books of fiqh destroys 



Introduction xxxiii 

the reliability of other abadith which they do not quote from depend¬ 
able books of baditb. The words of‘All al-Qarl contain an indication 
towards this: A Muslim must take abadith from the people who are ex¬ 
perts in that field, as the old Arabic sayings go, “The people of Makkah 
know its mountain paths best,” and “The owner of the house knows 
best what is in it.” 

6. Imam al-NawawI’s words in al-Majmid Sharh al-Mubadhdhab (1/60) 
are summarized as follows: “The researching scholars of Ahl al-hadith 
and others say that if the baditb is weak, it will not be said regard¬ 
ing it, ‘The Messenger of Allah said, did, commanded, forbade,’ 
or any other phrase designating certainty, but instead it will be said, 
‘It is reported, quoted, narrated from him,’ or other phrases suggest¬ 
ing uncertainty. They say that phrases of certainty are for sahib and 
hasan abadith, and phrases of uncertainty are for anything else. This 
is because phrases designating certainty mean that what follows is au¬ 
thentic, so they can only be used in the case of what is authentic, 
otherwise one would effectively be lying about him |§§. 

This convention is one ignored by most of the fiuqahd of our age, in 
fact, by most scholars of any discipline, except for the skilled muhad- 
dithin. This is disgusting carelessness, for they often say about a sahib 
baditb, ‘It is reported from him that...,’ and about a da‘if one, ‘he 
said’ and ‘so- and-so reported...,’ and this is far from correct.” 

7. [Original] Publisher’s Note: Also in this category are the works of our 
teacher, author of Irwd al-Gbalil fi takbrij Mandr al-Sabil in 8 vol¬ 
umes, and Ghdyah al-Mardm fi takbrij abadith al-Haldl wa al-Hardm, 
a takbrij of the abadith found in Dr. Yusuf al-Qaraciawi’s, The Lawfid 
and the Prohibited in Islam (which contains many da‘if abadith). 


Introduction 


xxxiv 


8 . The term “authentic hadith ” includes sahih and hasan in the eyes of the 
muhadditbin, whether the hadith is sahih li dhatihi or sahih lighayrihi, 
or hasan li dhatihi or hasan li ghayrihi. 

9. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

10. Sahih —collected by al-Tirmidhl, Ahmad, and Ibn Abi Shaybah. 

Shaykh Muhammad Sa‘ld al-Halabl cited it from al-Bukhdri in his 
al-Musalsaldt (1/2), but it is an oversight on his part. 

Later, I discovered that this hadith is actually da'if-.l had relied on 
al-ManawI in declaring sahih the isnad of Ibn Abi Shaybah, but then 
I happened to come across it myself, and found that it was clearly 
weak, being the same isnad as al-Tirmidhl and others — see my book 
Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Da‘ifah (#1783). However, its place is taken by 
the Prophet’s saying, “He who relates from me a saying which he 
knows is a lie is indeed one of the liars,” collected by Muslim and 
others. 

11. ‘Abd al-Hay al-LaknawI says in Imam al-Kaldm fimdyata'allaq bi al- 
Qird’ah Khalf dl-Imam (p. 156), as follows: “Whoever dives into the 
oceans of fiqh and the fundamentals of jurisprudence with an open 
mind, and does not allow himself to be prejudiced, will know with 
certainty that in most of the principal and subsidiary issues in which 
the scholars have differed, the madhhab of the Muhadditbin is firmer 
than other madhahib. Every time I go into the branches of difference 
of opinion, I find the view of the Muhadditbin nearest to justice— 
their reward is with Allah, and He will thank them. How could it be 
otherwise, when they are the true inheritors of the Prophet §§, and 


Introduction 


xxxv 


the sincere agents of his Law; may Allah include us in their company 
and make us die loving them.” 

12. Al-Subkl says in al-Fatdwd (i /148): “The most important affair of the 
Muslims is the prayer, which every Muslim must care about and en¬ 
sure its performance and the establishment of its essentials. Related 
to prayer are issues on which there is consensus and there is no es¬ 
caping the truth, and other issues in which the scholars have differed. 
The correct approach is either to keep clear of dispute if possible or to 
look for what is authentically proven from the Prophet si and adhere 
to that. When one does this, his prayer will be correct and righteous, 
and included in the words of The Exalted, «So whoever hopes to meet 
his Lord, let him work correct, righteous deeds.»” (Quran, 18:110) 

I say: The latter approach is superior, nay, obligatory; this is because 
the former approach, as well as being impossible for many issues, does 
not fulfill his command f§, “Pray as you have seen me praying,” but 
instead leads to one’s prayer being decidedly different to that of the 
Prophet L;. 

13. From the poetry of al-Hasan bin Muhammad al-NasawI, as narrated 
by al-Hafiz Diya al-Dln al-MaqdisI in his article on the excellence of 
kadith and its people. 

14. Surah al-Baqarah, 2:213. 

15. Al-Tirmidhl, al-Qudal, Ibn Bushran, and others. 

16. This is the sort of taqlid (blind following) which Imam al-TahawI was 
referring to when he said, “Only someone with party-spirit or a fool 


Introduction 


xxxvi 


blindly follows opinion”—quoted by Ibn ‘Abidin in Rasm al-Mnfti 
(vol. i, p. 32 from the Compilation of the Essays of Ibn ‘Abidin). 

7. Ibn ‘Abidin in al-Hdshiyah (1/63), and in his essay Rasm al-Mnfti (1/4 
from the Compilation of the Essays of Ibn Abidin ), Shaykh Salih al- 
Fullanl in Iqdz al-Himam (p. 62), and others. Ibn ‘Abidin quoted 
from Shark al-Hidayah by Ibn al-Shahnah al-Kablr, the teacher of Ibn 
al-Humam, as follows: 

“When a hadith contrary to the Madhhab is found to be sahih, one 
should act on the hadith, and make that his madhhab. Acting on the 
hadith will not invalidate the follower’s being a Hanafl, for it is au¬ 
thentically reported that Abu Hanlfah said, ‘When a hadith is found 
to be sahih, then that is my madhhab ,’ and this has been related by 
Imam Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr from Abu Hanlfah and from other Imams.” 

This is part of the completeness of the knowledge and piety of the 
Imams, for they indicated by saying this that they were not versed 
in the whole of the Sunnah, and Imam al-Shafi‘I has elucidated this 
thoroughly (see later). It would happen that they would contradict a 
snnnah because they were unaware of it, so they commanded us to 
stick to the Sunnah and regard it as part of their Madhhab. May Allah 
shower His mercy on them all. 

8. Arabic: haldl. 

9. Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in al-lntiqd fi Fada’il al-A’immah al-Thaldthah al- 
Fnqahd (p. 145), Ibn al-Qayyim in Elam al-Mnwaqq‘in (2/309), Ibn 
‘Abidin in his footnotes on al-Bahr al-Rd’iq (6/293) and in Rasm al- 
Mnfti (pp. 29 and 32) and al-Sha‘ranI in al-Mizdn al-Kubrd (1/55) 
with the second narration. The last narration was collected by ‘Abbas 



Introduction 


xxxvn 


al-Dawrl in al-Tdrikb by Ibn Ma‘In (6/77/1) with a sahib sanad on 
the authority of Zafar, the student of Imam Abu Hanlfah. Similar 
narrations exist on the authority of Abu Hanlfah’s companions: Zafar, 
Abu Yusuf, and ‘Afiyah bin Yazid; see Iqdz al-Himam (p. 52). Ibn al- 
Qayyim firmly certified its authenticity on the authority of Abu Yusuf 
in Fldm al-Muwaqqin (2/344). The addition to the second narration 
is referenced by the editor of Iqdz al-Himam (p. 65) to Ibn ‘Abd al- 
Barr, Ibn al-Qayyim, and others. 

If this is what they say of someone who does not know their evidence, 
what would be their response to one who knows that the evidence con¬ 
tradicts their saying, but still gives verdicts opposed to the evidence?! 
Therefore, reflect on this saying, for it alone is enough to smash blind 
following of opinion; that is why one of the muqallid sbaykbs, when 
I criticized his giving a verdict using Abu Hanlfah’s words without 
knowing the evidence, refused to believe that it was a saying of Abu 
Hanlfah! 

20. Arabic: bar dm. 

21. Arabic \fatwd. 

22. i.e. Imam Abu Hanlfah’s illustrious student, Abu Yusuf. 

23. This was because the Imam would often base his view on qiyds (anal¬ 
ogy), after which a more potent analogy would occur to him, or a 
hadith of the Prophet i; would reach him, so he would accept that 
and ignore his previous view. Al-Sha‘ranl’s words in al-Mizdn al-Kubrd 
(1/62) are summarized as follows: 


Introduction xxxviii 

“Our belief, as well as that of every researcher into Imam Abu Hanlfah, 
is that, had he lived until the recording of the Shari 1 ah, and the jour¬ 
neys of the Preservers of Hadith to the various cities and frontiers in 
order to collect and acquire it, he would have accepted it and ignored 
all the analogies he had employed. The amount of qiyds in his mad¬ 
hhab would have been just as little as that in other madhahib, but since 
the evidences of the Sharfah had been scattered with the Successors 
and their successors, and had not been collected in his lifetime, it was 
necessary that there be a lot of qiyds in his madhhab compared to that 
of other Imams. The later scholars then made their journeys to find 
and collect ahddith from the various cities and towns and wrote them 
down; hence, some ahddith of the Shari 1 ah explained others. This is 
the reason behind the large amount of qiyds in his madhhab, whereas 
there was little of it in other madhahib .” 

Abu al-Hasanat al-TaknawI quoted his words in full in al-Ndfi‘ al- 
Kabir (p. 135), endorsing and expanding on it in his footnotes, so 
whoever wishes to consult it, should do so there. 

Since this is the justification for why Abu Hanlfah has sometimes 
unintentionally contradicted the authentic ahddith —and it is a per¬ 
fectly acceptable reason, for Allah does not burden a soul with more 
than it can bear—it is not permissible to insult him for it, as some 
ignorant people have done. In fact, it is obligatory to respect him, for 
he is one of the Imams of the Muslims through whom this Din has 
been preserved and handed down to us, in all its branches; also, for he 
is rewarded under any circumstance: whether he is correct or wrong. 
Nor is it permissible for his devotees to continue sticking to those of 
his statements which contradict the authentic ahddith, for those state¬ 
ments are effectively not part of his madhhab, as the above sayings 



Introduction 


xxxix 


show. Hence, these are two extremes, and the truth lies in between. 
«Our Lord! Forgive us, and our brethren who came before us into the 
Faith; and leave not, in our hearts, any rancor against those who have 
believed. Our Lord! You are indeed Full of Kindness, Most Merciful.» 
(Surah al-Hashr, 59:10) 

24. Al-Fullani in Iqdz al-Himam (p. 50), tracing it to Imam Muhammad 
and then saying, “This does not apply to the mujtahid, for he is not 
bound to their views anyway, but it applies to the muqallid .” 

Al-Sha‘ranl expanded on that in al-Mizdn al-Kubrd (1/26): “If it is 
said: ‘What should I do with the ahddith which my Imam did not 
use, and which were found to be authentic after his death?’ The answer 
which is fitting for you is: ‘That you act on them, for had your Imam 
come across them and found them to be authentic, he would have 
instructed you to act on them, because all the Imams were captives in 
the hand of the Sharfah.’ He who does so will have gathered all the 
good with both his hands, but he who says, ‘I will not act according to 
a hadith unless my Imam did so,’ he will miss a great amount of bene¬ 
fit, as is the case with many followers of the Imams of the Madhdhib. 
It would be better for them to act on every hadith found to be authen¬ 
tic after the Imam’s time, hence implementing the will of the Imams; 
for it is our firm belief about the Imams that had they lived longer 
and come to know of those ahddith which were found authentic after 
their time, they would have definitely accepted and acted according 
to them, ignoring any analogies they may have previously made, and 
any views they may have previously held.” 

25. Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in Jami Bayan al-'Ilm (il^i), Ibn Hazm quoting 
from him in Usuial-Ahkdm (61 149), and similarly al-Fullanl (p. 72). 



Introduction 


xl 


26. This is well known among the later scholars to be a saying of Imam 
Malik. Ibn ‘Abd al-Hadl declared it sahib in Irshad al-Sdlik (227/1); 
Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in Jdmi‘Baydn al-‘Ilm (2/91) and Ibn Hazm in Usui 
al-Ahkdm (61 145, 6/179) had narrated it as a saying of al-Hakam bin 
‘Utaybah and Mujahid; TaqI al-Dln al-Subkl gave it, delighted with 
its beauty, in al-Fatdwd (1/148) as a saying of Ibn ‘Abbas i§|, and 
then said: “These words were originally those of Ibn ‘Abbas and Mu¬ 
jahid, from whom Imam Malik took them, and he became famous for 
them.” It seems that Imam Ahmad then took this saying from them, 
as Abu Dawud has said in Masd’il al-Imdm Ahmad (p. 276): “I heard 
Ahmad say, ‘Everyone is accepted and rejected in his opinions, with 
the exception of the Prophet i§|.’ ” 

27. Al-Jarh wa al-Ta‘dil (Introduction , pp. 31-32) by Ibn Abl Hatim. It 
was also narrated in full by al-Bayhaql in al-Sunan (1/81). 

28. Ibn Hazm says in Usui al-Ahkdm (6/118): “Indeed, all the fuqahd 
whose opinions are followed were opposed to taqlid, and they forbade 
their companions from following their opinion blindly. The sternest 
among them in this regard was Imam al-Shafi‘i, for he repeatedly em¬ 
phasized, more than anyone else, following the authentic narrations 
and accepting whatever the proof dictated; he also made himself in¬ 
nocent of being followed totally, and announced this to those around 
him. May this benefit him in front of Allah, and may his reward be 
of the highest, for he was the cause of great good.” 

29. Related by al-Hakim with a continuous sanad up to Imam al-Shafi‘I, 
as in Tdrikh Dimashq of Ibn ‘Asakir (15/1/3), Flam al-Muwaqqin 
(2/363-364), and Iqdz al-Himam (p. 100). 


Introduction 


xli 


30. Arabic: haldl. 

31. Ibn al-Qayyim (2/361) and al-Fullanl (p. 68). 

32. Al-Harawi in Dhamm al-Kaldm (3/47/1), al-Khatlb in al-Ihtijdj bi al- 
Imdm al-Shdfi‘i (8/2), Ibn ‘Asakir (15/9/10), al-NawawI in al-Majmu 
(1/63), Ibn al-Qayyim (2/361), and al-Fullanl (p. 100); the second 
narration is from Hilyah al-Awliyd! of Abu Nuaym. 

33. Al-NawawI in al-Majmu (1/63), al-Sha‘ranI (1/57), giving its sources 
as al-Hakim and al-Bayhaql, and al-Fullanl (p. 107). Al-Sha‘ranl said, 
“Ibn Hazm said, ‘That is.. .found to be sahib by him or by any other 
Imam.’ ” His saying given next confirms this understanding. 

Al-NawawI says: “Our companions acted according to this in the mat¬ 
ter of tathwib (calling to prayer in addition to the adhan), the con¬ 
ditions on coming out of ihrdm due to illness, and other issues well- 
known in the books of the Madhhab. Among those of our companions 
who are reported to have passed judgment on the basis of the badith 
(i.e. rather than the saying of al-Shafi‘1) are Abu Ya’qub al-BuwItl and 
Abu al-Qasim al-Darikl. Of our companions from the Muhaddithin, 
Imam Abu Bakr al-Bayhaql and others employed this approach. Many 
of our earliest companions, if they faced an issue for which there was 
a badith, and the madhhab of al-Shafi‘1 was contrary to it, would act 
according to the badith and give verdicts based on it, saying, ‘The 
madhhab of al-Shafi‘1 is whatever agrees with the badith.’ Shaykh Abu 
‘Amr (Ibn al-Salah) says, ‘Whoever among the ShafiTs found a badith 
contradicting the Madhhab, he would consider whether he fulfilled 
the conditions of ijtihad generally, or in that particular topic or issue, 



Introduction 


xlii 


in which case he would be free to act on the hadith, if not, but never¬ 
theless he found it hard to contradict the hadith after further analysis, 
he would not be able to find a convincing justification for opposing 
the hadith. Hence, it would be left for him to act according to the 
hadith if an independent Imam other than Imam al-Shafi‘I had acted 
on it, and this would be justification for his leaving the madhhah of 
his Imam in that issue.’ What he (Abu ‘Amr) has said is correct and 
established. Allah knows best.” 

There is another possibility which Ibn al-Salah forgot to mention: 
what would one do if he did not find anyone else who acted accord¬ 
ing to the hadith. This has been answered by TaqI al-Dln al-Subkl in 
his article, The Meaning of al-Shdfi‘Ts saying, “When a\yz&\x)n is found 
to he sahlh, then that is my madhhab” (vol. 3, p. 102): “For me, the 
best thing is to follow the hadith. A person should imagine himself in 
front of the Prophet i§|, just having heard it from him: would there 
be leeway for him to delay acting on it? No, by Allah.. .and everyone 
bears a responsibility according to his understanding.” 

The rest of this discussion is given and analyzed in Flam al-Muwaqqi- 
‘in (2/3 02, 3 70) and in the book Iqdz Himam ulu al-Absdr, li al-Iqtida ’ 
bi Sayyidal-Muhdjirin wa al-Ansdr, wa Tahdhiruhum ‘an al-Ibtida‘al- 
Shd’i fi al-Qurd wa al-Amsdr, min Taqlid al-Madhahib ma‘ al-Hamiy- 
yah wa al-‘Asabiyyah bayn al-Fuqahd’ al-A‘sdr (Awakening the Minds 
of Those who have Perception, towards Following the Leader of the Em¬ 
igrants and Helpers, and Warning them against the Innovation Wide¬ 
spread among Contemporary Jurists in the Towns and Cities, of follow¬ 
ing Madhahib with Zeal and Party-Spirit) by al-Fullanl. The latter is 
a unique book in its field, which every desirer of truth should study 
with understanding and reflection. 


Introduction 


xliii 


34. Addressing Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal. 

35. Related by Ibn Abi Hatim in Adab al-Shdfil wa mandqibihi (pp. 94- 
95), Abu Nu'aym in Hilyah al-Awliyd (9/106), al-Khatib in al-Ihtijdj 
bi al-Shdfi'i (8/1), and from him Ibn ‘Asakir (15/9/1), Ibn ‘Abd al 
Barr in al-Intiqd’ (p. 75), Ibn al-jawzl in Mandqib al-Imdm Ahmad 
(p. 499), and al-Harawi (2/47/2) with three routes from ‘Abd Allah 
bin Ahmad ibn Hanbal from his father that al-Shafi‘I said to him.. .etc; 
thus, it is authentic on the authority of al-Shafi‘I. This is why Ibn al- 
Qayyim attributed it definitely to him in Flam al-Muwaqqin (2/325), 
asdidal-Fullaniin Iqdz al-Himam (p. 152) andthensaid: “Al-Bayhaqi 
said, ‘This is why he—i.e. al-Shafi‘I—used hadith so much, because he 
gathered knowledge from the people of Hijaz, Syria, Yemen and Iraq, 
and so accepted all that he found to be authentic, without leaning 
towards or looking at what he had considered out of the madhhab 
of the people of his land when the truth was clear to him elsewhere. 
Some of those before him would limit themselves to what they found 
in the madhhab of the people of their land, without attempting to 
ascertain the authenticity of what opposed it. May Allah forgive us 
all.’ ” 

36. Abu Nu‘aym (9/107), al-Harawi (47/1), Ibn al-Qayyim in Flam al- 
Mnwaqqiin (2/363), and al-Fullani (p. 104). 

37. Ibn Abi Hatim in al-Adab (p. 93), Abu al-Qasim al-Samarqandi in al- 
Amdli, as in the selection from it by Abu Hafs al-Mu‘addab (234/1), 
Abu Nu‘aym (9/106), and Ibn ‘Asakir (15/10/1) with a sahih sanad. 

38. Ibn Abi Hatim, Abu Nu‘aym, and Ibn ‘Asakir (15/9/2). 



Introduction 


xliv 


39. Ibn Abl Hatim (pp. 93-94). 

40. Ibn al-jawzl in al-Mandqib (p. 192). 

41. Iqdz al-Himam (p. 113) and Vldm al-Muwaqqin (2/302). 

42. Arabic: ittibd\ 

43. Abu Dawud in Masd’ilal-Imdm Ahmad (pp. 276-277). 

44. Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in ]dmi Baydn al-Ilm (2/149). 

45. Ibn al-jawzl (p. 182). 

46. Even against their fathers and learned men, as al-TahawI in Sharb 
Ma'dnial-Athdr (1/372) and Abu Ya‘la in his Musnad (3/1317) have 
related, with an isndd of trustworthy men, from Salim bin ‘Abd Allah 
bin ‘Umar who said: “I was sitting with Ibn ‘Umar liffj in the 
masjid once, when a man from the people of Syria came to him and 
asked him about continuing the ‘Umrah onto the Hajj (known as Hajj 
al-TamatUij. Ibn ‘Umar i|§g replied, ‘It is a good and beautiful thing.’ 
The man said, ‘But your father (i.e. ‘Umar bin al-Khattab <%,) used to 
forbid it!’ So he said, ‘Woe to you! If my father used to forbid some¬ 
thing which the Messenger of Allah 0 practiced and commanded, 
would you accept my father’s view, or the order of the Messenger of 
Allah Hfs?’ He replied, ‘The order of the Messenger of Allah |§|.’ He 
said, ‘So go away from me.’ ” Ahmad (#5700) related similarly, as did 
al-Tirmidhl (2/82) and declared it sahib. 

Also, Ibn ‘Asakir (7/51/1) related from Ibn Abi Dhi’b, who said: 


Introduction 


xlv 


Sa‘d bin Ibrahim bin ‘Abd al-Rahman bin ‘Awf Jffe once 
judged a case on the basis of the opinion of Rabfah bin 
Abl ‘Abd al-Rahman, so I informed him of the saying of 
the Messenger of Allah |§| which was contradictory to 
the judgment. Sa‘d said to Rabfah, “We have Ibn Abl 
Dhi’b, whom I regard to be reliable, narrating from the 
Prophet |§| contrary to what I ruled.” Rabl‘ah said to him, 

“You have made your effort, and your judgment has been 
passed.” Sa‘d said, “Most amazing! I enforce the decree of 
Sa‘d, and not the decree of the Messenger of Allah i§|! No, 

I shall withdraw the decree of Sa‘d, son of the mother of 
Sa‘d, and enforce the decree of the Messenger of Allah |§i.” 

So Sa‘d called for the written decree, tore it up and gave a 
new verdict. 

47. In fact, he would be rewarded, because of the Prophet’s |§ saying, 
“When a judge passes judgment, if he performs ijtibdd and rules cor¬ 
rectly, he will have two rewards; if he performs ijtibdd and rules in¬ 
correctly, he will have one reward.” (Related by al-Bukharl, Muslim, 
and others.) 

48. Quoted in the notes on Iqdz al-Himam (p. 93) 

49. Al-FullanI (p. 99). 

50. Surah al-Waqi‘ah, (Quran, 56:13-14). 

51. Ibn ‘Abidin in al-Hdsbiyab (1/62), and al-LaknawI gave its source in 
al-Ndfi‘al-Kabir (p. 93) as al-Ghazzall. 


Introduction 


xlvi 


52. He himself says at the beginning of his Concise Shdfi'i Fiqh (printed 
in the margin of Imam al-ShafiTs al-Umm)\ “This book is a selection 
from the knowledge of Muhammad bin Idris al-Shafi‘1 and from the 
meanings of his sayings, to aid the understanding of whoever wants 
it, knowing of his forbidding the following of his or anyone else’s 
opinion, so that such a person may carefully look for his Din in it.” 

53. In which he has explained his opposing his Imam in about twenty 
masd’il (#42, #44, #103, #120, #158, #169, #172, #173, #228, #230, 
#240, #244, #274, #275, #284, #314, #331, #338, #355, #356)— 
from Taliq al-Mumajjid ‘aid Muwattd Muhammad (Important Notes 
on Muhammad’s Mnwattd) 

54. Ibn ‘Abidin mentioned him among them in al-Hdshiyah (1/74) and 
in Rasm al-Mufti (1/17). Al-QurashI mentioned him in al-Jawdhir 
al-Madiyyah fi Tabaqdt al-Hanafiyyah (p. 347) and said, “He was a 
reliable transmitter of hadith. He and his brother Ibrahim were the 
two shaykhs of Balkh of their time.” 

55. Al-Fawa’idal-Bahiyyah fi Tardjnm al-Hanafiyyah (p. 116). 

56. Al-Bahr al-Rd’iq (61 93) and Rasm al-Mufti (1/28). 

57. Al-Fawa’id al-Bahiyyah (p. 116); the author then added a useful note: 

From this can be deduced the falsity of Makhul’s narration 
from Abu Hanlfah: “that he who raises his hands during 
prayer, his prayer is ruined,” by which Amir, the scribe of 
ItqanI, was deceived, as has been mentioned under his bi¬ 
ography. ‘Isam bin Yusuf, a companion of Abu Yusuf, used 



Introduction 


xlvii 


to raise his hands, so if the aforementioned narration had 
any foundation, Abu Yusuf and ‘Isam would have known 
about it. It can also be deduced that if a Hanafi ignored 
the madhhab of his Imam in an issue due to the strength 
of the evidence against it, this would not take him outside 
the ranks of the Imam’s followers, but this would in fact 
be proper taqlid in the guise of leaving taqlid\ do you not 
see that ‘Isam bin Yusuf left Abu Hanlfah’s madhhab of 
not raising the hands, but he is still counted as a Hanafi? 
To Allah I complain of the ignorance of our time, when 
they insult anyone who does not follow his Imam in an 
issue because of the strength of evidence against it, and 
expel him from the fold of that Imam’s followers! This is 
not surprising when those who do this are from the ordi¬ 
nary masses, but it is amazing when it comes from those 
who imitate men of learning but plod along that path like 
cattle! 



Misconceptions Cleared 

The preceding introduction was written ten years ago, during which time it 
has become apparent to us that our words have had a positive effect on Mus¬ 
lim youth in guiding them towards the obligation in matters of their Din 
and worship to return to the pure sources of Islam: the Book and the Sun- 
nah. Among them, there was an increase in the ranks of of those who prac¬ 
ticed the Sunnah and devoted themselves to it—Praise be to Allah—such 
that they became conspicuous for it. However, I still found among some of 
them a steadfastness in failing to practice the Sunnah: not due to any doubt 
about its obligation after reading the Quranic verses and narrations from the 
Imams about going back to the Sunnah, but because of some objections and 
misconceptions which they had heard from some muqallid sbaykhs. There¬ 
fore, I decided to mention these incorrect notions and refute them, so that 
perhaps this would encourage more people to practice the Sunnah and thus 
be among the Saved Sect, in-shd-Alldh. 

Misconception One 

Some of them say, “There is no doubt that it is obligatory to return to the 
guidance of our Prophet §gs in the matters of our Din, especially in the recom¬ 
mended acts of worship such as prayer, where there is no room for opinion or 


xlviii 


Misconceptions Cleared 


xlix 


ijtihad, due to their immutable nature. However, we hardly hear any of the 
muqallid shaykhs propounding this; in fact, we find them upholding differ¬ 
ence of opinion, which they regard as flexibility for the Ummah. Their proof 
for this is the hadith which they repeatedly quote in such circumstances, 
when refuting the helpers of the Sunnah, ‘The difference of opinion ( ikhti - 
laf) among my Ummah is a mercy ( rahmah ).’ It seems to us that this hadith 
contradicts the principles to which you invite and based on which you have 
compiled this book and others. So, what do you say about this hadithT 

Answer: The answer is from two angles: 

Firstly: This hadith is not authentic; in fact, it is false and without foun¬ 
dation. ‘Allamah al-Subkl said, “I have not come across an authentic or weak 
or fabricated chain of narration for it,” i.e. no chain of narrators exists for 
this “hadith”\ 

It has also been related with the wordings: “...the difference of opinion 
among my Companions is a mercy for you,” and “My Companions are like 
the stars, so whichever of them you follow, you will be guided.” Both of 
these are not authentic: the former is very feeble; the latter is fabricated. (See 
Appendix A) 

Secondly: This hadith contradicts the Glorious Quran, for the dydt for¬ 
bidding division in the Din and enjoining unity are too well-known to need 
reminding. However, there is no harm in giving some of them by way of 
example: Allah says, 



...and do not fall into disputes, lest you lose heart and your 
power depart. (Quran: al-Anfal 46) 



Misconceptions Cleared 



And do not be among those who join deities with Allah, those 
who split up their religion and become sects—each party rejoic¬ 
ing with what it has! (Quran: al-Rum 31-32) 




if 


But they will not cease to differ, except those on whom your 
Lord bestows His Mercy. (Quran: Hud 118-119) 


Therefore, if those on whom your Lord has mercy do not differ, and the 
people of falsehood differ, how can it make sense that differing is a mercy?! 

Hence, it is established that this hadith is not authentic, neither in the 
chain of narration, nor in meaning; therefore, it is clear and obvious that 
it cannot be used to justify resistance towards acting on the Book and the 
Sunnah, which is what our Imams have commanded us anyway. 


Misconception Two 

Others say, “If differing in the Din is forbidden, what do you say about the 
differences among the Companions and among the Imams after them? Is 
there any distinction between their differing and that of later generations?” 

Answer: Yes, there is a big difference between these two examples of differ¬ 
ing, which manifests itself in two ways: firstly, in cause; secondly, in effect. 

As for the differing among the Companions, that was unavoidable, natu¬ 
ral difference of understanding: they did not differ by choice. Other factors 


Misconceptions Cleared 


li 


of their time contributed to this, necessitating difference of opinion, but 
these vanished after their era. 1 This type of differing is impossible to totally 
remove and such people cannot be blamed in the light of the above men¬ 
tioned dydt because of the absence of the appropriate conditions, i.e. differ¬ 
ing on purpose and insisting on it. 

However, as for the differing found among the muqallidin today, there is 
no overriding excuse for it. To one of them, the proof from the Book and 
the Sunnah is shown, which happens to support a madhhab other than his 
usual one, so he puts the proof aside for no other reason except that it is 
against his madhhab. It is as though his madhhab is the original, or it is the 
Din which Muhammad §§ brought, while other madhahib are separate Dins 
which have been abrogated! Others take the opposite extreme, regarding the 
madhahib —for all their differences—as parallel codes of Law, as some of 
their later adherents explain: 2 there is no harm in a Muslim taking what he 
likes from them and leaving what he likes, because they are all valid codes of 
Law! 

Both these categories of people j ustify their remaining divided by this false 
hadith, “The differing among my Ummah is a mercy”—so many of them we 
hear using this as evidence! Some of them give the reason behind this hadith 
and its purpose by saying that it ensures flexibility for the Ummah\ Apart 
from the fact that this reason is contrary to the clear Quranic verses and to 
the meanings of the Imams’ words mentioned, there are texts from some 
Imams to refute it. 

Ibn al-Qasim said, 

I heard Malik and al-Layth saying about the differing of the 
Companions of the Messenger of Allah , “It is not as people 
say: ‘There is flexibility in if; no, it is not like that, but it is a 
matter of some being mistaken and some being correct.” 3 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lii 


Ashhab said, 

Malik was asked about the person who accepted a hadith nar¬ 
rated by reliable people in the authority of the Companions of 
the Messenger of Allah g§|: “Do you see any flexibility there?” 
He said, “No, by Allah, so that he may be on the truth. Truth 
can only be one. Two contradictory views, can both be correct?! 
Truth and right are only one.” 4 

Imam al-Muzani, a companion of Imam al-Shafi‘I said, 

The Companions of the Messenger of Allah |§| indeed differed, 
and some of them corrected others. Some scrutinized others’ 
views and found fault with them. If all their views had been 
correct, they would not have done so. ‘Umar bin al-Khattab 
became angry at the dispute between Ubayy bin Ka‘b and 
Ibn Mas'ud Jl§fe about prayer in a single garment. Ubayy said, 
“Prayer in one garment is good and fine.” Ibn Mas'ud said, 
“That is only if one does not have many clothes.” So ‘Umar 
came out in anger, saying, “Two men from among the Com¬ 
panions of the Messenger of Allah i§|, who are looked up to 
and learned from, disputing? Ubayy has spoken the truth and 
not cared about Ibn Mas'ud. But if I hear anyone disputing 
about it after this I will do such-and-such to him.” 5 


Misconceptions Cleared 


liii 


Imam al-Muzanl also said, 

There is the one who allows differing and thinks that if two 
scholars make ijtibad on a problem and one says, “ Haldl ',” while 
the other says, “Hamm” then both have arrived at the truth 
with their ijtibadl It can be said to such a person, “Is this view 
of yours based on the sources or on qiyds (analogy)?” If he says, 

“On the sources,” it can be said, “How can it be based on the 
sources, when the Quran negates differing?” And if he says, 

“On analogy,” it can be said, “How can the sources negate dif¬ 
fering, and it be allowed for you to reason by analogy that dif¬ 
fering is allowed?!” This is unacceptable to anyone intelligent, 
let alone to a man of learning. 6 

If it is said further: “What you have quoted from Imam Malik that truth 
is only one, not plural, is contradicted by what is found in al-Madkbal al- 
Fiqbi (1/89) by Shaykh Zarqa: ‘The Caliphs Abu Ja‘far al-Mansur and later 
al-Rashld proposed to select the madbhab of Imam Malik and his book 
Mnwattd as the official code of Law for the Abbasid empire, but Imam Malik 
forbade them from this, saying, “Indeed, the Companions of the Messenger 
of Allah if| differed in the subsidiary issues and were scattered in various 
towns, BUT EACH OF THEM WAS CORRECT.” 

I say: This incident of Imam Malik is well-known, but his saying at the 
end, “but each of them was correct” is one for which I find no basis in any 
of the narrations or sources I have come across, 7 by Allah, except for one 
narration collected by Abu Nu'aym in Hilyab al-Awliyd (6/332), but with a 
chain of narrators which includes al-Miqdam bin Dawud who is classified 
among the weak narrators by al-Dhahabi in al-Du ‘afd\ not only this, but the 
wording of it is, “...but each of them was correct in his own eyes.” Hence 


Misconceptions Cleared 


liv 


the phrase “in his own eyes” shows that the narration in al-Madkbal is fabri¬ 
cated; indeed, how could it be otherwise, when it contradicts what has been 
reported on reliable authority from Imam Malik that truth is only one and 
not plural, as we have mentioned, and this is agreed on by all the Imams of 
the Companions and the Successors as well as the four Mujtabid Imams and 
others. Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr says, “If the conflicting views could both be right, 
the Salaf would not have corrected each other’s ijtibdd, judgments, and ver¬ 
dicts. Simple reasoning forbids that something and its opposite can both be 
correct; as the fine saying goes, 

To prove two opposites simultaneously is the most hideous ab¬ 
surdity.” 8 

If it is said further, “Given that this narration from Imam Malik is false, 
why did he forbid al-Mansur from bringing the people together on his book 
al-Mmuattd rather than acceding to the Caliph’s wish?” 

I say: The best that I have found in answer to this is what al-Hafiz Ibn 
Kathlr has mentioned in his Sbarb Ikbtisdr ‘Uliim al-Haditb (p. 31), that 
Imam Malik said, “Indeed the people have come together on, and know of, 
things which we are not acquainted with.” This was part of the excellence of 
his wisdom and impartiality, as Ibn Kathlr says. 

Hence, it is proved that all differing is bad, not a mercy! However, one 
type of differing is reprehensible, such as that of staunch followers of the 
Madbdbib, while another type is not blameworthy, such as the differing of 
the Companions and the Imams who succeeded them. May Allah raise us 
in their company, and give us the capability to tread their path. 

Therefore, it is clear that the differing of the Companions was not like 
that of the mnqallidin. Briefly: the Companions only differed when it was 
inevitable, but they used to hate disputes, and would avoid them whenever 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lv 


possible; as for the mnqallidin, even though it is possible in a great many 
cases to avoid differing, they do not agree nor strive towards unity; in fact, 
they uphold differing. Hence there is an enormous gulf between these two 
types of people in their difference of opinion. This was from the point of 
view of cause. The difference in effect is more obvious. 

The Companions, despite their well-known differing in subsidiary issues, 
were extremely careful to preserve outward unity, staying well-away from 
anything which would divide them and split their ranks. For example, there 
were among them those who approved of saying the basmalab loudly (in 
prayer) and those who did not; there were those who held that raising the 
hands (in prayer) was recommended and those who did not; there were those 
who held that touching a woman nullified ablution, and those who did not— 
but despite all that, they would all pray together behind one Imam, and none 
of them would disdain from praying behind an Imam due to difference of 
opinion. 

As for the maqallidin, their differing is totally opposite, for it has caused 
Muslims to be divided in the mightiest pillar of faith after the two testi¬ 
monies of faith: none other than the Saldh (prayer). They refuse to pray 
together behind one Imam, arguing that the Imam’s prayer is invalid, or at 
least detestable, for someone of a different madhhab. This we have heard and 
seen, as others beside us have seen; 9 how can it not be, when nowadays some 
famous books of the madhahib rule such cases as invalid or detestable. The 
result of this has been that you find four maharib (alcoves) in some large 
congregational mosques, in which four Imams successively lead the prayer, 
and you find people waiting for their Imam while another Imam is already 
standing in prayer! (See Appendix I) 

In fact, to some mnqallidin , the difference between the madhahib has 
reached a worse state than that, such as a ban in marriage between Hanafis 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lvi 


and Shaffls; one well known Hanafl scholar, later nicknamed Mufti al-Tha- 
qalayn (The Mufti of Humans and Jinn), issued a fatwd allowing a Hanafl 
man to marry a Shafi‘1 woman, because “her position is like that of the Peo¬ 
ple of the Book!” 10 This implies—and implied meanings are acceptable to 
them—that the reverse case is not allowed, i.e. a Hanafl woman marrying a 
Shaft‘1 man, just as a Muslim woman cannot marry a Jew or Christian! 

These two examples, out of many, are enough to illustrate to anyone in¬ 
telligent, the evil effects of the differing of the later generations and their 
insistence upon it, unlike the differing of the earlier generations (the Salaf ), 
which did not have any adverse effect on the Ummah. Because of this, the 
latter are exempt from the verses prohibiting division in the Din , unlike the 
later generations. May Allah guide us all to the Straight Path. 

Further, how we wish that the harm caused by such differing be limited to 
among themselves and not extend to the other peoples being given da ‘ wah , 
for then it would not be that bad, but it is so sad when they allow it to 
reach the disbelievers in many areas around the world, and their differing 
obstructs the entry of people in large numbers into the Din of Allah! The 
book Zaldm min al-Gharb by Muhammad al-Ghazzall (p. 200) records the 
following incident, 

It so happened during a conference held at the University of 
Princeton in America that one of the speakers raised a question, 
one which is a favorite of the Orientalists and the attackers of 
Islam: “Which teachings do the Muslims advance to the world 
in order to specify the Islam towards which they are inviting? 

Is it Islamic teachings as understood by the Sunnis? Or is it 
as understood by the Imdmi or Zaydi Sbi'ahs'i Moreover, all 
of these are divided further amongst themselves, and further, 
some of them believe in limited progression in thought, while 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lvii 


others believe obstinately in fixed ideas.” The result was that the 
inviters to Islam left those being invited in confusion, for they 
were themselves utterly confused. 11 

In the preface to Hadiyyab al-Sultdn ild Maslimi Bilad al-Ydbdn by ‘Al- 
lamah Sultan al-Ma‘sumI, the author says, 

A query was posed to me by the Muslims from Japan, from the 
cities of Tokyo and Osaka in the far east, “What is the actual 
Din of Islam? What is a madhhab ? Is it necessary for one enno¬ 
bled by the Din of Islam to adhere to one of the four Madhhabsl 
That is, should he be MalikI, Hanafi, Shafi‘I, or Hanball, or is it 
not necessary?” This was because a major differing, a filthy dis¬ 
pute, had occurred here, when a number of groups of Japanese 
intellectuals wanted to enter into the Din of Islam, and be en¬ 
nobled by the nobility of Imdn. When they proposed this to 
some Muslims present in Tokyo, some people from India said, 

“It is best that they choose the Madhhab of Abu Hanifah, for 
he is the Tamp of the Ummah some people from Indonesia 
(Java) said, “No, they should be Shdfi‘i\ ” So when the Japanese 
heard these statements, they were extremely perplexed and were 
thrown off their original purpose. Hence the issue of the mad- 
hhabs became a barrier in the path of their accepting Islam! 

Misconception Three 

Others have the idea that what we invite to, of following the Sunnah and 
not accepting the views of the Imams contrary to it, means to completely 
abandon following and benefiting from their opinions and ijtihad. 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lviii 


Answer: This idea is as far as can be from the truth—it is false and obvi¬ 
ously flawed, as is clearly evident from our previous discussion, all of which 
suggests otherwise. All that we are calling to is to stop treating the madhhab 
as a Din, placing it in the position of the Quran and the Sunnah, such that 
it is referred to in the case of dispute or when extracting a new judgment for 
unexpected circumstances, as the so-called jurists of this age do when setting 
new rules for personal matters, marriage, divorce, etc, instead of referring to 
the Quran and the Sunnah to distinguish the right from the wrong, the truth 
from falsehood—all of this on the basis of their “Differing is a mercy” and 
their idea of pursuing every concession, ease, and convenience! How fine 
was the saying of Sulayman al-Tayml: 

Were you to accept the concessions of every scholar, you would 
gather every evil. 

Related by Ibn Abd al-Barr in Jami Bayan al-Ilm (2/91-92), who said 
after it, “There is ijmd ‘ (consensus of opinion) on this: I know of no contrary 
view.” All this pursuing of concessions for the sake of it is what we reject, and 
it agrees with ijmd \ as you see. 

As for referring to the Imams’ views, benefiting from them, and being 
helped by them in understanding the truth where they have differed and 
there is no text in the Quran and the Sunnah, or when there is need for 
clarification, we do not reject it. In fact, we enjoin it and stress upon it, 
for there is much benefit expected in this for whoever treads the path of 
being guided by the Quran and the Sunnah. ‘Allamah Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr says 
(2/182), 

Hence, my brother, you must preserve the fundamentals and 
pay attention to them. You should know that he who takes care 



Misconceptions Cleared 


lix 


in preserving the sunan and the commandments stated in the 
Quran, considers the views of the jurists to assist him in his ijti- 
had, open up different angles of approach and explain snnan 
which carry different possible meanings, does not blindly fol¬ 
low the opinion of any one of them the way the Sunnah should 
be followed without analysis, nor ignores what the scholars 
themselves achieved in preserving and reflecting on the sunan, 
but follows them in discussion, understanding and analysis, is 
grateful to them for their efforts through which they have bene¬ 
fited him and alerted him about various points, praises them for 
their correct conclusions, as in the majority of cases, but does 
not clear them of errors just as they did not clear themselves: 
such is the pursuer of knowledge who is adhering to the way 
of the pious predecessors; such is the really fortunate and truly 
guided; such is the follower of the Sunnah of his Prophet *f|, 
and the guidance of the Companions. But he who refrains from 
analysis, forsakes the method we have mentioned, disputes the 
sunan with his opinion and desires to accommodate them only 
where his own view allows: such a one is straying and leading 
others astray. Furthermore, he who is ignorant of all we have 
mentioned, and plunges carelessly into giving verdicts without 
knowledge: such a one is even more blind, and on a path more 
astray. 

Misconception Four 

There exists another common misconception among muqallidin which bars 

them from practicing the Sunnah which it is apparent to them that their 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lx 


madhbab is different to it in that issue: they think that practicing that snnnah 
entails faulting the founder of the madhhab. To them, finding fault means 
insulting the Imam; if it is not allowed to insult any individual Muslim, how 
can they insult one of their Imams? 

Answer: This reasoning is totally fallacious, and borne of not understand¬ 
ing the Sunnah; otherwise, how can an intelligent Muslim argue in such a 
way?! 

The Messenger of Allah himself said, “When the one making a judg¬ 
ment strives his utmost and arrives at the correct result, he has two rewards; 
but if he judges, striving his utmost and passes the wrong judgment, he has 
one reward.” 12 This hadith refutes the above argument and explains lucidly 
and without any obscurity that if someone says, “So-and-so was wrong,” its 
meaning under the Shari'ah is “So-and-so has one reward.” So if he is re¬ 
warded in the eyes of the one finding fault, how can you accuse the latter of 
insulting him?! There is doubt that this type of accusation is baseless and any¬ 
one who makes it must retract it: otherwise it is he who is insulting Muslims, 
not just ordinary individuals among them, but their great Imams among the 
Companions, Successors, the subsequent Mujtahid Imams, and others. This 
is because we know for sure that these illustrious personalities used to fault 
and refute each other; 13 is it reasonable to say, “They used to insult each 
other”? No! In fact, it is authentically reported that the Messenger of Allah 
il himself faulted Abu Bakr in his interpretation of a man’s dream, saying 
to him, “You were right in some of it and wrong in some of it” 14 —so did he 
il insult Abu Bakr by these words?! 

One of the astonishing effects this misconception has on its holders is 
that it prevents them from following the Sunnah when it is different to their 
madhbab, since to them practicing it means insulting the Imam, whereas 
following him, even when contrary to the Sunnah, means respecting and 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lxi 


loving him! Hence they insist on following his opinion to escape from this 
supposed disrespect. 

These people have forgotten—I am not saying, pretended to forget —that 
because of this notion, they have landed in something far worse than that 
from which they were fleeing. It should be said to them, “If to follow some¬ 
one means that you are respecting him, and to oppose him means that you 
are insulting him, then how do you allow yourselves to oppose the example 
of the Prophet and not follow it, preferring to follow the Imam of the 
Madbhab in a path different to the Sunnah, when the Imam is not infalli¬ 
ble and insulting him is not KufrV. If you interpret opposing the Imam as 
insulting him, then opposing the Messenger of Allah |§3 is more obviously 
insulting him; in fact, it is open Kufr, from which we seek refuge with Al¬ 
lah!” If this is said to them, they cannot answer to it, by Allah, except one 
retort which we hear time and time again from some of them: “We have left 
this snnnah trusting in the Imam of the Madbhab, and he was more learned 
about the Sunnah than us.” 

Our answer to this is from many angles, which have already been discussed 
at length in this Introduction. This is why I shall briefly limit myself to one 
approach, a decisive reply by the permission of Allah. I say: 

The Imam of your Madbhab is not the only one who was more learned 
about the Sunnah than you: there are dozens, nay, hundreds, of Imams who 
too were more knowledgeable about the Sunnah than you. Therefore, if an 
authentic sunnah happens to differ from your madbhab, and it was taken 
by one of these other Imams, it is definitely essential that you accept this 
sunnah in this circumstance. This is because your aforementioned argument 
is of no use here, for the one opposing you will reply, “We have accepted this 
sunnah trusting in our Imam, who accepted it”—in this instance, to follow 
the latter Imam is preferable to following the Imam who has differed from 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lxii 


the Sunnah. 

This is clear and not confusing to anyone, in-sbd-Alldh. 

Because of all of the above, I am able to say: 

Since this book of ours has collected the authentic sunan reported from 
the Messenger of Allah Hjp about the description of his prayer, there is no ex¬ 
cuse for anyone to not act on it, for there is nothing in it which the scholars 
have unanimously rejected, as they would never do. In fact, in every instance 
several of them have adopted the authentic snnnah ; anyone of them who did 
not do so is excused and rewarded once, because the text was not conveyed 
to him at all, or it was conveyed but in such a way that to him it did not 
constitute proof, or due to other reasons which are well-known among the 
scholars. However, those after him in front of whom the text is firmly es¬ 
tablished have no excuse for following his opinion; rather, it is obligatory to 
follow the infallible text. 

This message has been the purpose of this Introduction. Allah, Almighty 
and Sublime, says, 


Isj jjijJii A IP's 
AAS As jJ\ \pi\j q 



O you who believe! Give your response to Allah and His Mes¬ 
senger when he calls you to that which will give you life, and 
know that Allah comes in between a man and his heart, and it 
is He to whom you shall all be gathered. 


(Quran: al-Anfal 24) 


Misconceptions Cleared 


lxiii 


Allah says the Truth; He shows the Way; and He is the Best to Protect and 
the Best to Help. May Allah send prayers and peace on Muhammad, and on 
his family and his Companions. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds. 

Muhammad Nasir al-Dln al-Albanl 
Damascus, Syria 
28 Shawwal 1389 



Endnotes 

1. Al-Ihkdm fi Usui al-Ahkdm by Ibn Hazm, Hujjat Allah al-Bdlighah by 
al-DehlawI, and the latter’s essay dealing specifically with this issue, 

' Iqdal-Jidfi Ahkdm al-Ijtihdd wa al-Taqlid. 

2. See Fayd al-Qadir by al-ManawI (1/209) or Silsilah al-Ahadith al- 
Daifah (1/76, #77). 

3. Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in ]dmi Baydn al-'Ilm (2/81-82). 

4. Ibid (2/82, 88-89). 

5. Ibid (2/83-84). 

6. Ibid (2/89). 

7. Al-Intiqd by Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr (41), Tadhkirah al-Huffdz by al-Dhahabl 
(1/195), an d Kashf al-MughattafiFadlal-Muwattd (pp. 6-7) by Ibn 
‘Asakir. 

8. ]dmi Baydn al-‘Ilm (2/88). 

9. See Chapter Eight of the book Md La Yajuz min al-Khildf (pp. 65-72), 
where you will find numerous examples of what we have indicated, 
some of them involving scholars of Al-Azhar. 


lxiv 



Misconceptions Cleared 


lxv 


Al-Bahr al-Rd ’iq. 

I now say: Muhammad al-Ghazzall’s recent writings such as his newly 
released book entitled al-Sunnah al-Nabawiyyah bayna Ahl al-Hadith 
wa Ahl al-Fiqh (The Prophetic Sunnah between the People of Hadith 
and the People ofFiqh) have confirmed that he himself is one of those 
inviters to Islam who are “themselves utterly confused”! His writings 
have for long betrayed his confusion, his distortion of the Sunnah, 
and his using his intellect to authenticate or falsify ahadith, not by 
turning to the principles and science of hadith, nor to the experts of 
that field; instead, whatever appeals to him, he authenticates, even if 
it is weak, and declares unreliable whatever is not to his liking, even 
if it is agreed to be authentic! 

His above approach is shown most obviously in his discussion of 
the ahadith in his previous book Fiqh al-Sirah, where he explains his 
methodology of accepting unreliable ahadith and discarding authen¬ 
tic ones on the basis of the text of the hadith alone, from which the 
reader can see that the objective criticism of hadith has no value in his 
eyes if it contradicts a “reasoned analysis,” which varies enormously 
from person to person, for what is truth to one is falsehood to an¬ 
other! Thus the whole of Islam becomes subject to personal whims, 
having no principles nor reference points except personal opinion; 
this is poles apart from the position of the early leading ‘ Ulamd of 
Islam, “that the Isnad is part of the religion; were it not for the Isnad, 
people would have said whatever they wished.” 

His latest aforementioned book has exposed to the people his Mu‘- 
tazilite methodology, his blatant disregard for the Imams of Hadith 
and their efforts over the ages in serving the Sunnah, and distinguish- 



Misconceptions Cleared 


lxvi 


ing the genuine traditions from the unreliable ones, and his lack of 
appreciation of the efforts of the Imams of Fiqh in their laying down 
principles and developing issues on that basis, for he takes from these 
and leaves from them whatever he wishes, with no consistency towards 
any set of principles or fundamentals! 

12. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

13. See the previous words of Imam al-Muzanl and al-Hafiz Ibn Rajab 
al-Hanball. 

14. Al-Bukharl and Muslim; see Appendix B for the full hadith. 



Chapter One 


Facing the Ka hah 

When the Messenger of Allah |§§ stood for prayer, he would face the Kabah 
in both obligatory and voluntary prayers, 1 and he ordered that, saying to 
the one who prayed badly , 2 “When you stand for prayer, perform ablution 
perfectly, then face the qiblab and say takbir!’ 3 

During a journey, he would pray voluntary prayers and witr on his 
mount, wherever it faced carrying him [east or west]. 4 

The saying of Allah, The Exalted, «Wherever you turn, there is the Face 
of Allah* (Quran, 2:115) applies to this. 5 

[Sometimes] when he * intended to pray non-obligatory prayers on his 
she-camel, he would make it face the qiblab, say takbir, and pray towards 
wherever his mount turned its face. 6 

He S§ would make rukfi ' and sajdab on his mount by lowering his head, 
making the sajdab lower than the ruku ‘7 

When he |j§ intended to pray obligatory prayers, he would dismount and 
face the qiblab ” 8 

In prayer during severe fear, he ; set the example for his Ummab to pray 
on foot, standing on their feet, or mounted; facing the qiblab or not facing 
it, 9 and he also said, “When they (the armies) meet, then it (i.e. the prayer) 
is takbir and indication with the head.” 10 

He Ip also used to say, “What is between the east and the west is qiblab 1 


1 


Facing the Ka ‘bah 


2 


Jabir said: 

Once, when we were with the Messenger of Allah on an 
expedition, the sky was cloudy, so we tried to find the qiblah 
but we differed, so each one of us prayed in a different direction, 
and each of us drew marks in front of him in order to mark our 
positions. In the morning, we looked at it and found that we 
had not prayed towards the qiblah. So we mentioned this to 
the Prophet |§| [but he did not order us to repeat (the prayer)] 
and he said: “Your prayer was sufficient.” 12 

He |§§ used to pray towards Bayt al-Mnqaddas [with the Ka'hah in front 
of him] before the following verse was revealed: «We see the turning of your 
faces to the heavens; now shall we turn you to a qiblah that shall please 
you: turn then your faces in the direction of the Sacred Mosque.» (Quran, 
2:144) When it was revealed, he faced the Ka ‘bah. There were people at Quba 
praying Fajr when someone came to them and said, “Verily the Messenger 
of Allah has had some of the Quran revealed to him last night and he has 
been ordered to face the Ka ‘bah, [verily] so face it.” Their faces were towards 
Sham, so they turned round [and their Imam turned round to face the qiblah 
along with them]. 13 


Endnotes 

1. This is a mutawdtir fact, so detail is not necessary, although some of 
the evidence for it will follow. 

2. S zz Appendix C. 

3. Collected by al-Bukharl, Muslim, and al-Siraj. 

4. Collected by al-Bukharl, Muslim, and al-Siraj. Its takbrij is given in 
Irwd al-Ghalil (#289 and #588). 

5. Muslim; al-Tirmidhl declared it sahib. 

6 . Abu Dawud, Ibn Hibban in al-Thiqdt (1/12), al-Diya in al-Mukhtd- 
rab with a hasan sanad,\ Ibn al-Sukn declared it sahib, as did Ibn al- 
Mulaqqin in Khuldsah badr al-Mnnir (22/1) and, before them, ‘Abd 
al-Haqq al-Ishblll in his Abkdm (#1394—with my checking). Imam 
Ahmad used it as proof, as Ibn HanI reported from him in his Masd’il 
(1/67). 

7. Ahmad and al-Tirmidhl, who declared it sahib. 

8. Al-Bukharl and Ahmad. 


3 



Facing the Ka ‘hah 


4 


9. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

o. Al-BayhaqI with a sanad meeting the requirements of al-Bukharl and 
Muslim. 

1. Al-TirmidhI and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and I have given it 
in Irwd al-Ghalil (#292), the publication of which Allah has made 
easy. 

2. Al-Daraqutnl, al-Hakim, al-Bayhaql, al-Tirmidhl, Ibn Majah, and al- 
Tabaranl; it is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#296). 

3. Al-Bukhari, Muslim, Ahmad, al-Siraj, al-Tabarani (3/108/2) and Ibn 
Sa‘d (1/234). h is also in Irwd al-Ghalil (#290). 



Chapter Two 


Standing in prayer 


Contents 

2. i The prayer of a sick person in a sitting position 6 

2.2 Prayer on a ship 7 

2.3 Sitting and standing in Saldh al- Tahajjud. 7 

2.4 Prayer wearing shoes and the command to do so 8 

2.5 Prayer on the minbar (pulpit) 9 

2.6 The sutrah and the obligation to have one 9 

2.7 What breaks the prayer 11 

2.8 Prohibition of prayer facing graves 11 

Endnotes 12 

He i§| used to stand in prayer for both obligatory and voluntary prayers, 
carrying out the command of The Exalted: «And stand before Allah de- 
voutly.» (Quran, 2:238) 

As for during a journey, he . would pray voluntary prayers on his riding 
beast. 

He set the example for his Ummah to pray during severe fear on foot 
or while mounted, as has been mentioned, and that is the purpose of the 
saying of Allah: 


5 




Standing in prayer 


6 


dji \y^j2ij Oj^L^a)\ jp ]pisU- 





Guard strictly your (habit of) prayers, especially the Middle 
Prayer, 1 and stand before Allah devoutly. If you fear (an en¬ 
emy) then pray on foot, or while riding. But when you are in 
security, celebrate Allah’s praises in the manner He has taught 
you, which you did not know before. 

(Quran: al-Baqarah 238-239) 


He f prayed sitting during the illness of which he died. 2 He also 
prayed sitting on another occasion before that, when he was injured, and 
the people behind him prayed standing; so he |j§ indicated to them to sit, 
so they sat (and prayed). When he finished, he said, “You were going 
to do as the Persians and the Romans do: stand for their kings who sit. So 
do not do so, for the Imam is there to be followed: when he makes rukii\ 
make rnku ', when he rises, rise; and when he prays sitting, pray sitting [all 
of you] .” 3 


2.1 The prayer of a sick person in a sitting position 

‘Imran bin Husayn tlfi, said, “I was suffering from hemorrhoids (piles), so I 
asked the Messenger of Allah |§ and he said, ‘Pray standing; if you are not 
able, then sitting down; if you are not able to do so, then pray lying down.’ ” 4 
‘Imran bin Husayn ti$§g also said, “I asked him about the prayer of a 
man while sitting, so he said: ‘He who prays standing, that is better; he who 



Standing in prayer 


7 


prays sitting, his reward is half that of the former. He who prays lying down 
(and in another narration: reclining), has half the reward of the one who 
sits .’” 5 This applies to the sick person, for Anas said, “The Messenger 
of Allah came out to the people while they were praying sitting due to 
illness, so he said: ‘Verily, the prayer of one who sits is (worth) half of the 
prayer of the one who stands.’ ” 6 

Once he |f§ visited a sick person and saw him praying (leaning) on a pillow, 
so he took it and cast it aside. So the man took a stick to pray (leaning) on 
it, but he took it and cast it aside and said: “Pray on the ground if you can, 
but otherwise make movements with your head, making your sujud lower 
than your rukti ‘.” 7 

2.2 Prayer on a ship 

He was asked about prayer on a ship, so he said, “Pray on it standing, 
unless you are afraid of drowning .” 8 

When he ■ grew old he took a support at his place of prayer to lean on . 9 

2.3 Sitting and standing in Saldh al- Tahajjud 

He |f| used to pray long through the night standing, and long through the 
night sitting, and if he recited standing, he would bow standing, and if he 
recited sitting, he would bow sitting . 10 

Sometimes, he ifj would pray sitting, so he would recite sitting until about 
thirty or forty verses of his recitation were left; he would then stand up to 
recite these standing and then bow and prostrate, and he would do likewise 
in the second rak'ah , n 


Standing in prayer 


In fact, he |§J prayed al-Subbab 12 sitting down towards the end of his life 
when he had grown old, and that was a year before his death. 13 

Also, he i§J would sit cross-legged. 14 

2.4 Prayer wearing shoes and the command to do so 

He used to stand (in prayer) bare-footed sometimes and wearing shoes 
sometimes. 15 

He i allowed this for his Ummah, saying: “When one of you prays, he 
should wear his shoes or take them off and put them between his feet, and 
not harm others with them.” 16 

He encouraged prayer wearing them sometimes, saying: “Be different 
from the Jews, for they do not pray in their shoes nor in their kbnjfs (leather 
socks).” 17 

Occasionally he §§ would remove them from his feet while in prayer and 
then continue his prayer, as Abu Said al-Khudrl has said: “The Messen¬ 
ger of Allah # prayed with us one day. Whilst he was engaged in the prayer 
he took off his shoes and placed them on his left. When the people saw this, 
they took off their shoes. When he finished his prayer he said, ‘Why did 
you take your shoes off?’ They said, ‘We saw you taking your shoes off, so 
we took our shoes off’ He said, ‘Verily Jibrll came to me and informed me 
that there was dirt—or he said: something harmful—(in another narration: 
filth) on my shoes, so I took them off. Therefore, when one of you goes to 
the mosque, he should look at his shoes: if he sees in them dirt—or he said: 
something harmful—(in another narration: filth) he should wipe them and 
pray in them.’ ” 18 

When he 3 removed them, he would place them on his left 19 and he §; 
would also say: “When one of you prays, he should not place his shoes on 


Standing in prayer 


9 


his right nor on his left, where they will be on someone else’s right, except if 
there is no one on his left, but he should place them between his feet.” 20 

2.5 Prayer on the minbar (pulpit) 

Once he J prayed on the pulpit (in another narration: .. .which had three 
steps) 21 . Hence [he stood on it and said takbir and the people behind him 
said takbir while he was on the pulpit],[then he made rukfd on the pulpit], 
then he rose and descended backwards to make sajdab at the foot of the 
pulpit. Then he returned, [and did on it as he had done in the first rak‘ah\, 
until he completed his prayer. He then turned to the people and said: “O 
people! I have done this so that you may follow me and learn my prayer.” 22 

2.6 The sutrah 23 and the obligation to have one 

He used to stand near to the sutrah, so that there was (a distance of) three 
cubits between him and the wall 24 and between the place of his prostration 
and the wall, (there was) enough space for a sheep to pass. 25 

He used to say: “Do not pray except towards a sutrah, and do not let 
anyone pass in front of you, but if someone continues (to try to pass) then 
fight him, for he has a companion (i.e. a sbaytdn) with him.” 26 

He ijs would also say: “When one of you prays towards a sutrah, he should 
get close to it so that Shaytan cannot break his prayer.” 27 

Sometimes, he |§| sought to pray at the pillar which was in his mosque. 28 
When he | prayed [in an open space where there was nothing to use 
as sutrah\ he would plant a spear in the ground in front of him and pray 
towards it with the people behind him; 29 sometimes he would to set his 
mount sideways and pray towards it 30 but this is not the same as prayer in 


Standing in prayer 


io 


the resting-place of camels, 31 which he forbade, 32 and sometimes he would 
take his saddle; set it lengthwise and pray towards its end. 33 

He r would say: “When one of you places in front of him something 
such as a stick or the end of a saddle, he should pray and not mind anyone 
who passes beyond it.” 34 

Once he prayed towards a tree 35 and sometimes he would pray towards 
the bed on which ‘A’ishah «§a was lying [under her sheet]. 36 

He . would not let anything pass between him and his sntrab, hence 
once he was praying, when a sheep came running in front of him, he raced 
it until he pressed his belly against the wall [and it passed behind him]. 37 

Also, once while praying an obligatory prayer, he |§J clenched his fist (dur¬ 
ing it), so when he had finished, the people said: “O Messenger of Allah, did 
something happen during the prayer?” He said: “No, except that the devil 
wanted to pass in front of me, so I strangled him until I could feel the cold¬ 
ness of his tongue on my hand. By Allah! Had my brother Sulayman ®it 
not beaten me to it, 38 I would have tied him (the devil) to one of the pillars 
of the mosque so that the children of Madinah could walk round him. [So 
whoever can prevent something intervening between him and the qiblab, he 
must do so].” 39 

He S §3 also used to say: “When one of you prays towards something which 
is a sutrab between him and the people and someone intends to cross in front 
of him, then he should push him in the throat [and repel, as much as he can], 
(in one narration: he should stop him, twice) but if he refuses (to not pass) 
then he should fight him, for verily he is a devil.” 40 

He • also used to say: “If the person who passed in front of someone 
praying knew (the sin) on him, it would be better for him to wait forty than 
to pass in front (Abu al-Nadr said, ‘I do not remember exactly whether 
he said forty days, months, or years.’)” 41 


Standing in prayer 


11 


2.7 What breaks the prayer 

He used to say: “A man’s prayer is cut off when there is nothing such as 
the end of a saddle in front of him, by: a [menstruating] 42 woman, a donkey, 
or a black dog.” Abu Dharr i%, said, “I said: ‘O Messenger of Allah, why the 
black dog rather than the red one?’ ” He said, “The black dog is a sbaytdnS Ai 

2.8 Prohibition of prayer facing graves 

He 0 used to forbid prayer facing the grave, saying: “Do not pray towards 
the graves, and do not sit on them.” 44 


Endnotes 


1. i.e. the Asr prayer according to the correct saying of the majority of 
scholars, among them Abu Hanlfah and his two students. There are 
ahadtih about this which Ibn Kathir has given in his tafsir of the Qu¬ 
ran. 

2. Al-TirmidhI, who declared it sahib, and Ahmad. 

3. Muslim and al-Bukharl, and it is given in my book Irwd al-Ghalil 
under hadith #394. 

4. Al-Bukharl, Abu Dawud, and Ahmad. 

5. Ibid. Al-Khattabl said, “The meaning of‘Imran’s hadith is intended 
for a sick person who is able to undergo hardship and stand with 
difficulty. Hence the reward of praying sitting has been made half 
of the reward of praying standing: encouraging him to pray standing 
while allowing him to sit.” Ibn Hajr said in Fath al-Bdri (2/468): “This 
deduction is valid.” 


6. Ahmad and Ibn Majah with a sahih sanad. 



Standing in prayer 


13 


7. Al-Tabarani, al-Bazzar, Ibn al-Samak in his hadith book (67/2) and al- 
Bayhaql. It has a sahih isnad as I have explained in Silsilah al-Ahadith 
al-Sahihah (#323). 

8. Al-Bazzar (#68), al-Daraqutni, ‘Abd al-Ghani al-Maqdisi in his Sunan 
(82/2), and al-Hakim declared it sahib and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

9. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih, as did al-Dhahabl. 
I have given it in al-Sahihah (#319) and al-Irwd (#383). 

10. Muslim and Abu Dawud. 

11. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

12. i.e. voluntary prayer (night or forenoon), named so due to its content 
of tashih (glorification). 

13. Muslim and Ahmad. 

14. Al-Nasa’I, Ibn Khuzaymah in his sahih (1/107/2), ‘Abd al-Ghani al- 
Maqdisi in his Snnan (80/1), and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and 
al-Dhahabl concurred. 

15. Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah. It is a mntawdtir hadith as al-TahawI has 
mentioned. 

16. Abu Dawud and al-Bazzar ( al-Zawa’id, p. 53); Al-Hakim declared it 
sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

17. Ibid. 



Standing in prayer 


14 


18. Abu Dawud, Ibn Khuzaymah, and al-Hakim who declared it sahib 
and al-Dhahabl and al-Nawawi concurred. The first one is given in 
al-Irwd (#284). 

19. Ibid. 

20. Abu Dawud, al-Nasa’I, and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/110/2) with a sahih 
isnad. 

21. This is the snnnab about the pulpit: that it should have three steps, 
not more. To have more is an innovation, from the period of Bani 
‘Umayyah, which often causes an interruption in the row, and to get 
out of that by having it in the western corner of the mosque or in the 
mihrdb is another innovation, as is the raising of it in the wall like a 
balcony to which one ascends by means of steps in the wall! Whereas 
the best guidance is the guidance of Muhammad See Fath al-Bdri 
(2/331). 

22. Al-Bukharl, Muslim (who collected the other narration), and Ibn Sa‘d 
(1/253). It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#545). 

23. literally: screen, cover; in the context of prayer, it refers to an object 
just beyond the place of prostration, within which nothing should 
pass, as is detailed in this section. 

24. Al-Bukharl and Ahmad. 

25. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

26. Ibn Khuzaymah in his Sahih (1/93/1) with a sound isnad. 


Standing in prayer 


15 


27. Abu Dawud, al-Bazzar (p. 54, al-Zawa’id), and al-Hakim who de¬ 
clared it sahih and al-Dhahabi and al-NawawI concurred. 

28. Al-Bukharl. The sutrah is a must for the Imam or a person praying 
alone, even in a large mosque. Ibn HanI said in his Masd’il (1 166 ) 
from Imam Ahmad: “Abu ‘Abd Allah (i.e. Imam Ahmad ibn Hanbal) 
saw me one day when I was praying without a sutrah in front of me, 
and I was in a (large) congregational mosque, so he said to me: ‘Take 
something as a sutrah,’ so I took a man as a sutrah .” This contains 
an indication that Imam Ahmad did not differentiate between big or 
small mosques in taking a sutrah —and that is surely correct, but this 
is something neglected by most people, including Imams of mosques 
in every land that I have visited, including Arabia which I was able 
to tour in Rajab of this year (ah 1410), so the ‘Ulamd should tell the 
people and advise them of this, explaining its ruling and that it is also 
required in the Two Sacred Mosques. 

29. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and Ibn Majah. 

30. Al-Bukharl and Ahmad. 

31. i.e. their kneeling place. 

3 2. Al-Bukharl and Ahmad. 

33. Muslim, Ibn Khuzaymah (92/2), and Ahmad. 

34. Muslim and Abu Dawud. 

35. Al-NasaT and Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 



Standing in prayer 


16 


36. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and Abu Ya‘la (3/1107). 

37. Ibn Khuzaymah in his Sahih (1/95/1), al-Tabarani (3/140/3), and al- 
Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

38. Referring to the following prayer of the Prophet Sulayman §§&. which 
was answered by Allah, as described in the Quran: «My Lord! Forgive 
me, and grant me sovereignty not allowed to anyone after me, for You 
are indeed the Granter of Bounties. So we subjected to his power: the 
Wind, gently flowing to his order, wherever he wished; and the devils, 
every kind of builder and diver, and also others bound together in 
fetters.* (Quran, 38:35-38) 

39. Ahmad, al-Daraqutnl, and al-Tabarani with a sahih isnad. Similar in 
meaning to this hadith is found in al-Bukharl, Muslim, and others on 
the authority of several Companions. It is one of the many ahadith 
which the QadiyanI group disbelieve, for they do not believe in the 
world of the Jinn which is mentioned in the Quran and the Sunnah. 
Their method of discarding the texts is well-known: if it is from the 
Quran, they change its meaning, e.g. the saying of The Exalted: «Say, 
it has been revealed to me that a group of Jinn listened...* (Surah al- 
Jinn 72:1); they say “i.e. a group of humans”! making the word jinn 
synonymous with hnman\ Ffence they play with the language and 
thus religion; if it is from the Sunnah, then if it is possible for them 
to change it with a false interpretation they do so, otherwise they find 
it easy to declare it to be false, even if all the Imams of Hadith and 
the whole Ummah behind them are agreed on its authenticity, nay its 
being mntawdtir. May Allah guide them. 



Standing in prayer 


17 


40. Al-Bukhari and Muslim, and the additional narration is from Ibn 
Khuzaymah (1/94/1). 

41. Ibid. 

42. i.e. mature, and what is meant by “cut off’ is “rendered futile.” As 
regards the haditfr. “Nothing cuts off the prayer,” then it is a weak 
hadith as I have shown in Tamdm al-Minnah (p. 306). 

43. Muslim, Abu Dawud, and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/95/2). 

44. Ibid. 



Chapter Three 


Intention and Opening Takbir 


Contents 

3.1 Raising the hands 19 

3.2 The command to place the right arm on the left 19 

3.3 To place the hands on the chest 19 

3.4 To look at the place of prostration and humility 20 
Endnotes 22 

He J§§ used to say: “All actions are by intention, 1 and every man shall have 
what he intended.” 2 


Then he would commence the prayer by saying: 

“Allah is the Greatest.” 3 

He ordered the one who prayed badly to do likewise as has been men¬ 
tioned, and he said to him: “Verily, the prayer of a person is not complete 
until he has made an ablution which has included the necessary parts of the 
body and has then said: Allahu Akbar.’ ” 4 

He £§5 also used to say: “The key to the prayer is purification, it is entered 
by takbir and exited by tasliml ’ 5 





Intention and Opening Takbir 


19 


Also, he §§ used to raise his voice for the takbir such that those behind 
him could hear. 6 But, when he fell ill Abu Bakr used to raise his voice to 
convey the takbir of the Messenger §| to the people. 7 

He k would also say: “When the Imam says: Allahu Akbar,’ then say, 
Allahu Akbar.’ ” 8 

3. i Raising the hands 

He | would raise his hands sometimes with the takbir , 9 sometimes after 
the takbir , 10 and sometimes before it. 11 

He S§ would raise them with fingers apart [not spaced out completely, 
nor together], 12 and he would put them level with his shoulders, 13 although 
occasionally, he would raise them until they were level with [the tops of] his 

14 

ears. 


3.2, The command to place the right arm on the left 

He used to place his right arm on his left, 15 and he used to say: “We, the 
company of prophets, have been commanded to hasten the breaking of the 
fast, to delay the meal before the fast, and to place our right arms on our left 
arms during prayer.” 16 

Also, he Hi passed by a man who was praying and had placed his left arm 
on his right, so he pulled them apart and placed the right on the left. 17 

3.3 To place the hands on the chest 

He used to place the right arm on the back of his left palm, wrist, and 
forearm, 18 and he commanded his companions to do likewise, 19 and (some- 


Intention and Opening Takbir 


20 


times) he would grasp his left arm with his right. 20 

He | used to place them on his chest. 21 

Also, he used to forbid putting one’s hand on the waist during prayer 
[and he put his hand on his waist (to demonstrate)]. 22 And this is the silb 
(cross) which he used to forbid. 23 

3.4 To look at the place of prostration and humility 

He ij§ used to incline his head during prayer and fix his sight towards the 
ground. 24 While he was in the Ka‘bab, his sight did not leave the place of 
his prostration until he came out from it; 25 and he said, “It is not fitting that 
there should be anything in the house which disturbs the person praying.” 26 

He used to forbid looking up at the sky, 27 and he emphasized this pro¬ 
hibition so much that he said: “People must refrain from looking up at the 
sky in prayer, or their sight will not return to them (and in one narration: or 
their sight will be plucked away).” 28 In another baditb. “So when you pray, 
do not look here and there, for Allah sets His Face for the face of his slave in 
his prayer as long as he does not look away,” 29 and he also said about looking 
here and there, “It is a snatching away which the devil steals from the slave 
during prayer.” 30 

He S§3 also said: “Allah does not cease to turn to a slave in his prayer as long 
as he is not looking around; when he turns his face away, Allah turns away 
from him.” 31 He i§| forbade three things: pecking like a hen, squatting (iq'a) 
like a dog, and looking around like a fox. 32 He 0 * also used to say, “Pray a 
farewell prayer as if you see Him, but if you do not see Him, surely He sees 
you;” 33 and, “Any person who, when an obligatory prayer is due, excels in its 
ablution, humility, and bowings, will have it as a remission for his previous 
minor sins as long as he does not commit a major sin, and this (opportunity) 


Intention and Opening Takbir 


21 


is for all times .” 34 

Once he §§:*, prayed in a kbamisah 35 and (during the prayer) he looked at 
its marks. So when he finished, he said: “Take this kbamisah of mine to Abu 
Jahm and bring me his anbijdniyyab , i6 for it has diverted my attention from 
the prayer (in one narration: for I have looked at its marks during the prayer 
and it almost put me to trial ).” 37 Similarly, ‘A’ishah up had a cloth with 
pictures spread towards a sabwab, is towards which the Prophet |§| prayed 
and then said, “Take it away from me [for its pictures did not cease to thwart 
me in my prayer ].” 39 

He would also say: “Prayer is not valid when the food has been served, 
nor when it is time to relieve oneself of the two filths .” 40 


Endnotes 

1. Al-Nawawl says in Rawdah al-Tdlibin (1/224, Maktab al-Islaml edi¬ 
tion): 

The intention is the purpose, so the person about to pray 
brings to mind that prayer and what is relevant of its char¬ 
acteristics, such as which prayer it is, whether it is obliga¬ 
tory etc. and he brings these things together in his inten¬ 
tion with the first takbir. 

2. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and others. It is given in Irwd al-Gbalil (#22). 

3. Muslim and Ibn Majah. The hadith contains an indication that he 
did not use to commence it with the words of some people: “I intend 
to pray, etc.” which is in fact agreed to be an innovation. But they 
differ as to whether it is a good or bad innovation, to which we say: 
“Indeed all innovations in worship are misguided, from the generality 
of his statement ■£, ‘and all innovations are misleading, and every 
misleading thing is in the Fire.’ ” But this is not the place for a detailed 
discussion of this. 

4. Al-TabaranI with a sahih isndd. 


22 


Intention and Opening Takbir 


23 


5. Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhl, and al-Hakim who declared it sahib and 
al-Dhahabl concurred. It is given in Irwd al-Gbalil (#301). 

Literally, “the takbir makes it hardm ,” i.e. the actions which Allah has 
made hardm during it, “and the taslim makes it baldl i.e. what is 
allowed outside prayer. Just as the hadith proves that the door to prayer 
is shut, no worshiper being able to open it except with purification, it 
similarly proves that the prayer cannot be entered except with takbir, 
and that it cannot be exited except with taslim. This is the view of the 
majority of scholars. 

6. Ahmad and al-Hakim who declared it sahib and al-Dhahabl agreed. 

7. Muslim and al-Nasa’L 

8. Ahmad and al-Bayhaql with a sahib isnad. 

9. Al-Bukharl and al-Nasa’I. 
o. Ibid. 

1. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

2. Abu Dawud, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/62/2, 64/1), Tammam, and al-Ha- 
kim who declared it sahib and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

3. Al-Bukharl and al-Nasa’I. 

4. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

5. Muslim and Abu Dawud. It is also given in Irwd al-Gbalil (#352). 

6. Ibn Hibban and al-Diya, with a sahib isnad. 



Intention and Opening Takbir 


24 


17. Ahmad and Abu Dawud, with a sahih isnad. 

18. Abu Dawud, al-Nasa’I, and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/54/2) with a sahih 
isnad. Ibn Hibban declared it sahih (48 5). 

19. Malik, al-Bukharl, and Abu ‘Awanah. 

20. Al-Nasa’I and al-Daraqutnl with a sahih isnad. In this hadith there is 
evidence that grasping is from the sunnah, and in the previous hadith 
that so is placing, so both are snnnah. As for the combination of hold¬ 
ing and placing, which some of the later Hanafls hold to be good, then 
that is an innovation; its form as they state is to place the right hand 
on the left, holding the wrist with the little finger and the thumb, and 
laying flat the remaining three fingers, as described in Ibn ‘Abidins 
footnotes on al-Dnrr al-Mnkhtdr (1/454); so do not be confused by 
what they say. 

21. Abu Dawud, Ibn Khuzaymah in his Sahih (1/54/2), Ahmad and Abu 
Shaykh in Tdrikh Ashahdn (p. 125); Al-TirmidhI declared one of its 
isnads hasan, and its meaning is found in al-Muwattd and Sahih al- 
Bnkhdri if considered carefully I have fully quoted the isnads of this 
hadith in my boob Ahkdm al-Jand’iz (p. 118). 

Note: To place them on the chest is what is proved in the Sunnah, 
and all that is contrary to it is either da‘if or totally baseless. In fact, 
Imam Ishaq bin Rahawayh acted on this sunnah, as al-MarwazI said in 
Masd’il (p. 222): “Ishaq used to pray witr with us and he would raise 
his hands in qunut, and make the qunut before bowing, and place 
his hands on his breast or just under his breast.” Similar is the saying 
of al-Qadl ‘Iyad al-Malikl under the section, Mustahahbdt al-Saldh in 



Intention and Opening Takbir 


^5 


his book al-Pldm (p. 15, 3 rd edition, Rabat): “The right arm is to be 
placed on the back of the left, on the upper part of the chest.” Close to 
this is what ‘Abd Allah bin Ahmad ibn Hanbal related in his Masd’il 
(p. 62): “I saw that when praying, my father placed his hands, one on 
the other, above the navel.” See Appendix D. 

22. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#374) as well 
as the following one. 

23. Abu Dawud, al-Nasa’I, and others. 

24. Al-BayhaqI and al-Hakim who declared it sahib and it is as he said. 
It also has a strengthening hadith reported by ten of his Companions 
transmitted by Ibn ‘Asakir (17/202/2). See Irwd al-Ghalil (#354). 

Note: These two ahadith show that the sunnah is to fix one’s sight 
on the place of prostration on the ground, so the action of some wor¬ 
shipers of closing their eyes during prayer is misdirected piety, for the 
best guidance is the guidance of Muhammad §§|. 

25. Ibid. 

26. Abu Dawud and Ahmad with a sahib isnad (Irwd al-Ghalil, #1771); 
what is meant here by ‘the House’ is the Ka ‘bah, as the context of this 
hadith shows. 

27. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

28. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and al-Siraj. 

29. Al-TirmidhI and al-Hakim, who declared it sahib. See Sahib al-Tar- 
ghib (#3 5 3)- 


Intention and Opening Takbir 


2 6 


30. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

31. Transmitted by Abu Dawud and others. Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Hib- 
ban declared it sahib. See Sahib al-Targhib (#555). 

3 2. Ahmad and Abu Ya‘la. See Sahib al- Targhib (#55 6). 

3 3. Al-Mukhlis in Ahadith Muntaqdt, al-Tabaranl, al-Ruyanl, Ibn Majah, 
Ahmad, Ibn ‘Asakir, and al-Diya in al-Mnkhtdrah. Al-Haytaml de¬ 
clared it sahib in Asnd al-Matdlib. 

34. Muslim. 

35. A woolen garment having marks. 

36. A coarse garment without marks. 

37. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and Malik. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#3y6). 

38. A small room embedded in the ground slightly, like a small chamber 
or cupboard. ( Nihdyah ) 

39. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and Abu ‘Awanah. The Messenger 0 did not or¬ 
der the wiping out or tearing of the pictures but only removed them 
because—and Allah knows best—they were not pictures of things 
having souls. The evidence for this is that he ■ tore other pictures 
as proved by many narrations in al-Bukharl and Muslim, and who¬ 
ever wishes to explore this further should consult Ghdyah al-Mardm 
fi TakhrijAhadith al-Haldlwa al-Hardm (#131-145) and Fath al-Bdri 
(10/321). 


40. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 


Chapter Four 


Opening Supplications 


Next, he . would commence his recitation with many kinds of supplica¬ 
tions in which he would praise Allah The Exalted, and glorify and extol Him. 
He in fact ordered the one who prayed badly to do so, saying to him: “No per¬ 
son’s prayer is complete unless he says takbir, praises Allah, Almighty and 
Sublime, and extols Him, recites of the Quran what is easy for him.. ,” 1 He 
|fj would say any one of the following supplications: 


ti—<3O-Cc-Li \dS Ctyp 

e-JjSJl fyQ; liS" CiJjUUai- ( j>> 


“O Allah! Separate me (far) from my sins as you have separated (far) 
the East and West. O Allah! Cleanse me of my sins as white cloth is 
cleansed from dirt. O Allah! Wash me of my sins with water, ice, and 
snow.” He . used to say this in obligatory prayers. 2 


27 


Opening Supplications 


28 


4aJ tjAj j - 3 j ^ 4^i ^^_*aaS^ (^)]_ 

cdJl 'll ail N cJiUJl oil ^JJI cJftJJLiJI jjf isfj o>l iuL} 

i^J, C^jjo 0%3^jA_C-Ij ( j^j 2 j CC-o-Up Ulj Co I [tdl-C^j 

(^A^J ^ t(3'^>'^l ^j, JJSjIj COol N) i_CLSLJ ^ Ajl cljCs^* 

tCo I ^11^ ^ ^ -C- c3y^2J ^ 1Sc ^ 1^ ^Co I ^11^ 

$ ^ -• ^ ^^0 

Id [tc-o-xjt cCJ] t ^*C toA_>jo (3 

<CCU5) CS^IC [<CCl CC kc % CC N] ‘CCJJ Co 

.ccic/j 


“I have set my face towards the Originator of the heavens and the earth 
sincerely [in Islam] and I am not among the Musbrikin. Indeed my 
prayer, my sacrifice, my living, and my dying are for Allah, the Lord 
of the Worlds; no partner has He. With this I have been commanded, 
and I am the first of the Muslims. 3 O Allah! You are the King, none 
has the right to be worshiped but You, [You are the Most Perfect and 
all Praise is for You.] You are my Lord and I am Your slave. 4 I have 
wronged myself, and have acknowledged my sins, so forgive all my 
sins, for no one forgives sins except You. Guide me to the best of 
characters, to which no one can guide except You, and save me from 
the worst of characters, from which no one can save except You. I am 
here and happy to serve you. 5 All good is in your Hands, and evil is 
not from You. 6 [The guided one is he who is guided by you.] I exist 
by your will and belong to You. [There is no escape or shelter from 
You except to You.] You are blessed and exalted. I seek Your forgiveness 
and repent to You.” He |§| used to say this in obligatory and voluntary 
prayers. 7 


Opening Supplications 


29 


3. Similar to the above, without 


. . C-ol 


“You are my Lord and I am Your slave..to the end, with the follow¬ 
ing addition: 


«cJt Sfi ill M «iujl 



“O Allah! You are the King, there is no (true) deity except You, glori¬ 
fied be You and praised.” 8 


4. Similar to no. 2 until 


jji \-k 


.. .and I am the first of the Muslims,” adding: 


sc S\ Si) 4; ^ Cr^J t y^i. (JaaI ^lll 

■Ool V) IplL jjEj V tJUiMlj 


“O Allah, guide me to the best of characters and the best of actions, 
no one to which can guide except You, and save me from the evil 
characters and actions, from which no one except You can save.” 9 


. Jjj-Ss 2)) *)lj j] Hi. jl*Sj rl iljUSj I4JJI 


“You are Glorified, 10 O Allah, and Praised; 11 Your Name is Blessed; 12 
Your Majesty 13 is Exalted, and none has the right to worshiped but 
You.” 14 He i| also said, “Indeed, the words most loved by Allah are 
when His slave says: ‘You are glorified, O Allah.’ ” 15 


6. Similar to the above, adding in prayer at night: 

“There is no true god except Allah,” three times, and, 


Opening Supplications 


30 


at 


“Allah is the Greatest, Very Great,” three times. 
y 5 Ah) Ah yS 1 4 jtil 


“Allah is the Greatest, Very Great. Praise be to Allah, again and again. 
Glorified is Allah morning and evening.”—one of the Companions 
commenced with this, to which the Messenger said: “Won¬ 
derful for it (the supplication) is that the doors of the heavens were 
opened for it.” 16 

.a_J Vjlli Lit "\yg£ \j jf- a3j jLJ-1 


“Praise be to Allah, many, pure, blessed praises.” Another Companion 
commenced with this, to which he § said: “I saw twelve angels 
competing as to which of them would take it up.” 17 


(j. yls dol jl^-1 LAIj 4 ( Cx°J O IjL-lll jji cuil til! 

OljllUl (jAL* lSoI tlilj] 

3 > - ^>- 3ilJ^>- UjXjj c 3^d tiUj 

ciAJ ^ 3^d^3 3>* a^LuJIj (3^" ^^3 3^ 4-^*3 

idlj iLj *d43t iUij ccJ3l iLj ccJj5 dUkj 

\jaj O1 Laj C—4-3 IA (J, 31^3 Wj 

C-olj jJLJl C-ol ^ C-ol IA^ILlI-UJx-I Laj OjJ^l 

[.iL sjl Mj] .cif \ \ H 3it] 


“O Allah, to You belongs all Praise. You are the Light 18 of the heav¬ 
ens and the earth and all those in them; To You belongs all Praise. 
You are the Maintained 9 of the heavens and the earth and all those 


Opening Supplications 


3i 


in them; [To You belongs all Praise. You are the King of the heavens 
and the earth and all those in them.] To You belongs all Praise. You 
are the Haqq ; 20 Your promise is haqq-, Your saying is haqq-, meeting 
You is haqq\ Paradise is haqq-, the Fire is haqq-, the Hour is haqq-, the 
Prophets are haqq-, Muhammad is haqq. O Allah! To You I have sub¬ 
mitted; in You I have placed my trust; in You I have believed; To You 
I have turned; for Your sake I have fought; To You I have referred for 
judgment; [You are our Lord and to You is the end of all journeys, so 
forgive me my earlier and later sins, what I have concealed and what 
I have showed] [and whatever else You know about more than I.] You 
are the Bringer-Forward and You are the Delayer; [You are my deity;] 
and none has the right to worshiped but You. 21 [And there is no might 
nor power except with You.]” 


He used to say this in prayer at night, as he did the following 
supplications: 22 


- -—’ ^ C-ol .A3 j 1 

._^ JplciAj} cetljiL y? 4^3 IA 1 


“O Allah, Lord of Jabra’il, Mlka’ll and Israfil, Creator of the heavens 
and the earth, Knower of all that is hidden and open! It is You that will 
judge between Your servants in those matters about which they used 
to differ. Guide me by Your Grace to the Truth concerning that about 
which they differed, for indeed You guide whomsoever You wish to a 
path that is straight.” 23 


11. He would say takhir, tahmid, tasbih, tahlil, and istighfdr ten times 
each, and then say, 


Opening Supplications 


32 


p-6-^ 


“O Allah! Forgive me, have mercy on me, guide me, (and) give me 
sustenance [and overlook my sins]” ten times, and then say: 




“O Allah! I seek refuge with You from the distress of the Day of Ac¬ 
count,” TEN TIMES . 24 


0^13 iiii 


“Allah is the Greatest [three times], Possessor of Kingdom, Power, 
Magnificence and Might .” 25 


Endnotes 

1. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and Ibn Abl Shaybah (i 2/110/2). It is given in 
Irwd al-Ghalil (#8). 

2. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

3. It is thus in most of the narrations; in some, it is wa ana min al- 
muslimin (“I am one of the Muslims”). It is likely that this is because 
of the mistake of one of the narrators, and other evidence points to 
that, so the worshiper should say: wa ana awwal al-muslimin (“I am 
the first of the Muslims”). There is nothing wrong with that, contrary 
to what some people say under the impression that this means “I am 
the first person who has this quality, while the rest of the people do 
not.” But it is not so; this phrase actually represents competing to ful¬ 
fill orders—similar to this is «Say: if the Merciful God has a son, then I 
am the first of the worshipers* (Surah al-Zukhruf, 43:81) and the say¬ 
ing of Musa, «...and I am the first of the believers.* (Surah al-A‘raf, 
7:i43) 

4. Al-Azharl said: i.e. “I do not worship anything other than You.” 


33 



Opening Supplications 


34 


5. Arabic labbayk\ “I am firmly and continually present in Your obedi¬ 
ence;” 

Arabic sa‘dayk\ “extremely happy under Your order and devoutly fol¬ 
lowing the Din which You have chosen.” 

6. i.e. Evil cannot be traced back to Allah because there is nothing bad 
in His actions, for they are all good, ranging from justice to grace to 
wisdom, all of which are good with no bad in them. But Evil is evil 
because it cannot be traced back to Allah. Ibn al-Qayyim said: “He is 
the Creator of good and evil, but the evil exists in some of His crea¬ 
tures, not in His act of creating nor in His actions. Hence The Exalted 
is cleared of any zulm, which is fundamentally to put something in 
other than its proper place. He does not put anything except in its suit¬ 
able place, so that is all good. But Evil is to put something in other 
than its proper place: when it is put in its proper place it is not evil, 
so be sure that Evil is not from Him. .. .But if it is said: ‘Why did He 
create something which is evil?’ I would say: ‘He did the creating, and 
His action is good not evil, for creation and action is with Allah, and 
it is impossible for Evil to be with, or attributed to, Allah. Anything 
evil in the created cannot be traced back to Allah, but His actions and 
His creation can be attributed to Him, so they are good.’ ” The rest 
of this important discussion as well as its conclusion is to be found 
in his book, Sbifd al-Alilfi Masd’il al-Qadd wa al-Qadr wa al-Talil 
(pp. 178-206). 

7. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, Abu Dawud, al-Nasa’i, Ibn Hibban, Ahmad, 
al-Shafi‘1, and al-Tabaranl; those who specify it to optional prayers 
are mistaken. 



Opening Supplications 


35 


8. Al-Nasa I with a sahih isnad. 

9. Al-Nasa I and al-Daraqutnl with a sahih isnad. 

o. i.e. I glorify You, meaning I consider You totally free from any defi¬ 
ciency. 

1. i.e. we are submerged in Your praise. 

2. i.e. the blessings of Your Name are great, for great good springs from 
the remembrance of Your Name. 

3. i.e. Your Glory and Might. 

4. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. Al-‘Uqayll said (p. 103): “this has been narrated via several 
routes with good isnads .” It is given in Irwa al-Ghalil (#341), trans¬ 
mitted by Ibn Mandah in al-Tawhid (123/2) with a sahih isnad and 
al-Nasa’I in al-Yawm wa al-Laylah as mawqiif and marfu, as in ]ami 
al-Masanid of Ibn Kathir (vol. 3, pt. 2, p. 235/2) [Typesetter’s Note: 
The reference to Jdmi‘ al-Masanid is regarding a manuscript edition 
and thus may not correspond with printed editions]. 

5. Abu Dawud and al-TahawI with a hasan isnad. 

6 . Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah; declared sahih by al-Tirmidhl. It has also 
been narrated in Akhbdr Ishahdn (1/210) by Abu Nu'aym fromjubayr 
bin Mut‘am who heard the Prophet |j§ saying it in voluntary prayer. 

7. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 


Opening Supplications 


36 


18. i.e. You are the Giver of Light to them, and those in them are guided 
by You. 

19. i.e. the Protector and the constant Watcher over them. 

20. Arabic baqq\ truth, reality. 

21. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, Abu Dawud, Ibn Nasr and al- 
Dariml. 

22. Although that clearly does not rule out using them in the obligatory 
prayers also, except for the Imam, so that he does not prolong the 
prayer for the followers. 

23. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

24. Ahmad, Ibn Abi Shaybah (12/119/2), Abu Dawud and al-Tabaranl 
in Mu‘jam al-Awsat (62/2) with one isnad sahib, and another basan. 


25. Al-TayalisI and Abu Dawud with a sahib isnad. 



Chapter Five 


Recitation 

Contents 

5.1 Recitation of one ayah at a time 39 

5.2 The necessity of al-Fdtihah and its excellence 39 

5.3 The abrogation of recitation behind the Imam in the 
loud prayers 41 

5.4 The obligation to recite in the quiet prayers 42 

5.5 The amin and the Imam’s saying it loudly 42 

5.6 The recitation after al-Fdtihah 43 

5.7 Combining similar surahs and others in one rak‘ah 44 

5.8 The permissibility of reciting al-Fdtihah only 45 

5.9 Mode of recitation in the five prayers and others 46 
5. r o Quiet and loud recitation in the Tahajjud prayer 47 
5.11 What he iti used to recite in the different prayers 48 

Fajr Prayer .48 

Recitation in the Sunnah prayer before Fajr . 49 

Zuhr Prayer. 50 

Recitation of ay at after al-Fdtihah in the last two rak ‘ahs 5 o 

'Asr Prayer. 51 

Maghrib Prayer. 51 


37 








Recitation 


38 


Recitation in the Sunnah prayer after Maghrib .... 52 

‘Isha Prayer. 52 

Tahajjud Prayer. 53 

Witr Prayer. 56 

Friday Prayer. 56 

Eid Prayer. 57 

Funeral Prayer. 57 


5.12 Tartil and making the voice beautiful when reciting 57 

5.13 Correcting the Imam 59 

5.14 Seeking refuge and spitting lightly during prayer in 
order to repel temptation 59 

Endnotes 60 

Next, he ij§ would seek refuge with Allah The Exalted, saying, 

. j C' h.. "•'^ alllj 

“I seek refuge with Allah from the Evil One, the Rejected, from his mad¬ 
ness, 1 his arrogance, and his poetry.” 2 Sometimes he |§| would add to this, 
saying, 

. . (jl *.U pdjdl 1 alllj 

“I seek refuge with Allah, the all-EIearing, the all-Knowing, from the Evil 
One...” 3 

Then he would recite, 

4iii 

“In the Name of Allah, the Most Merciful, the Bestower of Mercy,” but 
not loudly. 4 











Recitation 


39 


5. i Recitation of one ayah at a time 

Next, he i§8 would recite al-Fatihah and divide his recitation, reciting one 
ayah at a time. He ; would say, 

4 ^^*) 1 h ail 

[Here he S§§ would pause, and then say,] 

{jJUh 4*5 aJJ nil) 

[Then he j§ would pause, and then say,] 

[Then he i§ would pause, and then say,] 

.. .and so on, until the end of the siirah. The rest of his recitation was 
also like this: stopping at the end of the ayah and not joining it with the one 
after. 5 

Sometimes, he Ip would recite, 

“King of the Day of Judgment,” instead of, 

“Master of the Day of Judgment.” 6 

5.2, The necessity of al-Fatihah and its excellence 

He i§ would vehemently emphasize the importance of this surah , saying, 
“There is no prayer for the one who did not recite [in it] the opening chapter 
[at least],” 7 and in another saying, “That prayer is not sufficient in which a 
man does not recite the Opening of the Book.” 8 He ■ also said, “He who 
performs a prayer in which he does not recite the Opening of the Book, then 
it (i.e. the prayer) is deficient, it is deficient, it is deficient, incomplete.” 9 


Recitation 


40 


He |§ also said, “Allah the Blessed and Exalted has said, ‘I have divided 
the prayer 10 between Myself and My servant, into two halves: half of it is for 
Me and half is for My servant, and My servant shall have what he has asked 
for.’ ” 

Then the Messenger of Allah Sg said, “Recite! The servant says «Praise be 
to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds.* Allah The Exalted says, ‘My servant has 
praised Me.’ The servant says, «The Most Merciful, the Bestower of Mercy.» 
Allah says, ‘My servant has extolled Me.’ The servant says «Master of the 
Day of Judgment.* Allah The Exalted says, ‘My servant has glorified Me.’ 
The servant says, «It is You (alone) we worship and it is You (alone) we ask 
for help.* [He says,] ‘This is between Me and My servant, and My servant 
shall have what he has asked for.’ The servant says, «Guide us to the Straight 
Path, the Path of those whom You have favored, not of those who receive 
Your anger, nor of those who go astray.* [He says,] All these are for My 
servant, and My servant shall have what he has asked for.’ ” n 

He | also used to say, “Allah did not reveal in the Torah or the Gospel 
anything like the Mother of the Quran. It is the Seven Oft-Repeated 12 [and 
the Grand Recitation which has been bestowed upon me].” 13 

He |§ commanded the one who prayed badly to recite it in his prayer, 14 
but said to the one who could not remember it to say, 


.4AJU $sjs % j>. Njiiiij.aiii \ \% <4AS juilj w&l 6G-4I, 


“I declare Allah free from all defects; all Praise be to Allah; none has the 
right to be worshiped but Allah; Allah is The Greatest; there is no might or 
power except by Allah.” 15 

He | also said to the one who prayed badly, “If you know some of the Qu¬ 
ran, then recite it, otherwise praise Allah, declare His Greatness and declare 
that none has the right to be worshiped but Allah.” 16 


Recitation 


4i 


5.3 The abrogation of recitation behind the Imam in the 
loud prayers 

He had given permission for those being led by the Imam to recite al- 
Fdtihah in the loud prayers, when once: 

He Sj§ was praying Fajr and the recitation became difficult for 
him. When he finished, he said, “Perhaps you recite behind 
your Imam.” We said, “Yes, quickly, 17 O Messenger of Allah.” 

He said, “Do not do so, except for [each of you reciting] the 
opening chapter of the Book, for the prayer is not valid of the 
one who does not recite it.” 18 

Later, he forbade them from reciting in the loud prayers at all, when: 

He § finished a prayer in which he was reciting loudly (in one 
narration: it was the dawn prayer) and said, “Were any of you 
reciting with me just now?!” A man said, “Yes, I was, O Mes¬ 
senger of Allah.” He said, “I say, why am I contended with?” 

[Abu Hurayrah said,] So the people stopped reciting with 
the Messenger of Allah |f§ when he was reciting loudly after 
hearing that from him [but they recited to themselves quietly 
when the Imam was not reciting loudly]. 19 

He ; also made silence during the Imam’s recitation part of the com¬ 
pleteness of following the Imam, saying, “The Imam is there to be followed, 
so when he says takbir, say takbir, and when he recites, be silent,” 20 just as 
he iff made listening to the Imam’s recitation enough to not have to recite 
behind him, saying, “He who has an Imam, then the recitation of the Imam 
is recitation for him,” 21 —this applying in the loud prayers. 


Recitation 


42 


5.4 The obligation to recite in the quiet prayers 

As for the quiet prayers, he urged them to recite during them; Jabir 4%, 
said, “We used to recite behind the Imam in Zuhr and Asr: Al-Fdtihah and 
another surah in the first two rak'ahs, and al-Fdtihah in the last two.” 22 

However, he |§p dissuaded them from confusing him with their recitation, 
when: 


He |f| prayed Zuhr with his Companions and said (afterwards), 
“Which of you recited «Glorify the name of your Lord the 
Most High.» (Quran, 87:1)?” Someone said, “It was I [but I 
was only intending nothing but good by doing so]So he |§J 
said, “I knew that someone was contending with me by it.” 23 
In another hadith. “They used to recite behind the Prophet H§ 
[loudly], so he said, ‘You have mixed up my (recitation of the) 
Quran.’ ” 24 

He IfJ also said, “Truly, the person praying is privately consulting his Lord, 
so he should be careful about what he consults him with, and you should 
not recite the Quran loudly over each other.” 25 

He Hf? also used to say, “Whoever recited a harf (letter) from the Book of 
Allah, it will count for him as one good deed, and a good deed is worth ten 
times over. I do not mean that alifldm mini is a harf, but alif is a harf, lam 
is a harf, and mim is a harf.” 26 

5.5 The dmin and the Imams saying it loudly 

When he finished reciting al-Fdtihah, he would say, 


Recitation 


43 


Amin loudly, prolonging his voice. 27 

He also used to order the congregation to say dmin\ “When the Imam 
says, 

^1 -'A \ .fi ^ -1 C - i— mo i ■■ 1 \ ^ 

«Not of those who receive (Your) anger, nor of those who go astray.», then 
say dmin for the angels say dmin and the Imam says dmin, so he whose dmin 
coincides with the dmin of the angels (in another narration: when one of you 
says dmin in prayer and the angels in the sky say dmin, and they coincide), 
his past sins are forgiven.” 28 In another haditb “.. .then say dmin\ Allah will 
answer you.” 29 

He §§ also used to say, “The Jews do not envy you over anything as much 
as they envy you over the salutation and dmin [behind the Imam] ” 30 

5.6 The recitation after al-Fatihah 

Next, he §|s would recite another surah after al-Fdtihah, making it long some¬ 
times, and on other occasions making it short because of travel, cough, ill¬ 
ness, or the crying of infants. 

Anas ibn Malik said, “He made it [i.e. the recitation] short one day 
in the dawn prayer.” (In another haditb. he prayed the morning prayer and 
recited the two shortest siirahs in the Quran.) So it was said, “O Messenger 
of Allah, why did you make it short?” He said, “I heard the crying of a child, 
and I supposed that his mother was praying with us, so I wanted to free his 
mother for him.” 31 

He also used to say, “I enter into prayer intending to lengthen it, but I 
hear the crying of a child so I shorten my prayer because I know how deeply 
his mother feels about his crying.” 32 


Recitation 


44 


He 7 used to start from the beginning of a siirab, completing it most of 
the time. 33 

He i§ used to say, “Give every siirab its share of rnku ' and sujud ” 34 In 
another narration: “Every siirab should have a rak‘ab” 3i 

Sometimes he |. would divide the siirab into two rak ‘abs i6 and sometimes 
he would repeat the whole siirab in the second rak'ah? 7 

Sometimes he ; . would combine two or more surahs in one rak‘ab. is 

One of the Ansar used to lead them in the mosque of Quba, and every 
time he recited a siirab 39 for them, he would begin with «Say: He is Allah, 
the One and Only.» (Quran, 112:1) until its end, and then recite another 
siirab with it, and he would do this in every rak ‘ah. Because of this, his people 
spoke to him, saying, “You begin with this surah, and then you do not regard 
it as enough until you recite another one. You should either recite it (only) 
or leave it and recite another one.” He said, “I will not leave it. If you do not 
mind me leading you with it, I shall carry on, but if you do not like it, I shall 
leave you.” They knew that he was one of their best, and they did not like 
to be led by anyone else, so when the Prophet |$p came to them, they told 
him the story. He 7 said: “O so-and-so, what stops you from doing what 
your people ask you to? What makes you recite this surah in every rak'ahV 
He said, “I love this siirab .” He Hi said, “Your love for it will enter you into 
the Garden.” 40 

5.7 Combining similar surahs and others in one rak‘ah 

He used to combine the pairs 41 of the mufassal A 2 surahs, so he used to 
recite one of the following pairs of surahs in one rak‘ah Ai : 

• al-Rahmdn (55:78)^ and al-Najm (53:62) 

• al-Qamar (54:55) and al-Hdqqah (69:52) 


Recitation 


45 


• al-Tfir (52:49) and al-Dhdriydt (51:60) 

• al-Wdqi'ah (56:96) and al-Qalam (68:52) 

• al-Ma‘drij (70:44) and al-Ndzidt (79:46) 

• al-Mutaffifin (83:36) and ‘Abasa (80:42) 

• al-Muddaththir (74:56) and al-Muzzammil (73:20) 

• al-Dahrl al-Insdn (76:31) and al-Qiydmah (75:40) 

• al-Naba (78:40) and al-Mursaldt (77:50) 

• al-Dukhdn (44:59) and al-Takwir (81:29) 

Sometimes he Ip combined surahs from the seven tiwdl (long surahs), 
such as al-Baqarah, al-Nisd, and Al ' Imran in one rak'ah during night prayer 
(soon to follow). He used to say, “The most excellent prayer is one with 
long standing.” 45 

When he |§J recited, «Does He not have the power to give life to the 
dead?» (Quran, 75:40), he • would say, 

“Glory be to You, of course!” 

and when he jf| recited, «Glorify the name of your Lord Most High.» 
(Quran, 87:1), he would say, 

3j 

“Glorified be my Lord Most High.” 46 

5.8 The permissibility of reciting al-Fatihah only 

Mu‘adh bin Jabal used to pray ‘Ishd [the last] with the Messenger of 
Allah H, and then return and lead his people in prayer. One night when 
he returned and prayed with them, a young man [called Sulaym ift,, of the 
Banu Salamah] from his people prayed, but when it became too long for him, 


Recitation 


46 


he [went away and] prayed [in the corner of the mosque,] then came out, 
took the reins of his camel and departed. When Mu'adh had prayed, this 
was mentioned to him, so he said, “He surely has some hypocrisy in him! I 
will surely tell the Messenger of Allah i§| what he has done.” The young man 
said, “And I will tell the Messenger of Allah what he has done.” So in the 

morning they came to the Messenger of Allah |§j, and Mu‘adh informed him 
of what the young man had done. The young man said, “O Messenger 
of Allah! He stays a long time with you, and then he returns and lengthens 
it for us.” So the Messenger of Allah said, “Are you one who causes great 
trouble, Mu'adh?!” and he said to the young man, 47 “What do you do when 
you pray, son of my brother?” He said, “I recite the opening chapter of the 
Book, then I ask Allah for the Garden, and seek refuge with Him from the 
Fire. I know neither your dandanab A& nor the dandanab of Mu‘adh!” So the 
Messenger of Allah said, “I and Mu'adh are similar in this.” 

The narrator said: The young man said, “But Mu'adh die will know 
(about me) on going to the people when they will have been informed that 
the enemy has arrived.” The narrator said: So the enemy came, and the young 
man attained shahadah (martyrdom). So after that, the Messenger of Allah 
i! said to Mu'adh, “What did the one disputing with me and you do?” He 
said, “O Messenger of Allah, he was true to Allah, and I spoke falsely—he 
was martyred.” 49 

5.9 Mode of recitation in the five prayers and others 

He 0 used to recite loudly in the morning prayer and in the first two rak \ahs 
of Maghrib and Isha, and quietly in Zuhr, ‘Asr, the third rak‘ah of Maghrib 
and the last two rak'ahs of ‘Ishde’ 0 

They could tell when he was reciting quietly from the movement of 


Recitation 


47 


his beard, 51 and because he would let them hear an ayah or so sometimes. 52 

He IfJ also recited loudly in Friday prayer and the two Eid prayers, 53 in 
the prayer for rain, 54 and in the eclipse prayer. 55 

5.10 Quiet and loud recitation in the Tahajjud prayer 

As for night prayer, 56 he S§ would sometimes recite quietly and sometimes 
loudly, 57 and he used to recite in his house such that he could be heard in the 
courtyard. 58 Occasionally he would raise his voice more than that until 
someone lying in bed could hear him (i.e. from outside the courtyard). 59 

He ordered Abu Bakr and ‘Umar ^ likewise, when: 

He came out at night to find Abu Bakr praying in a 
low voice, and he passed by ‘Umar bin al-Khattab ills who was 
praying in a loud voice. Later, when they gathered around, the 
Prophet 0 said, “O Abu Bakr, I passed by you and you were 
praying in a low voice?” He ift, said, “I let Him whom I was 
consulting hear, O Messenger of Allah.” He said to ‘Umar 
i%, “I passed by you and you were praying raising your voice?” 

So he dls said, “O Messenger of Allah, I repel drowsiness and 
keep the devil away.” The Prophet |§J said, “O Abu Bakr, raise 
your voice a little bit,” and to ‘Umar “lower your voice a 
little bit.” 60 

He 7 used to say, “The one who recites the Quran loudly is like the one 
who gives charity loudly, and the one who recites the Quran quietly is like 
the one who gives charity quietly.” 61 


Recitation 


48 


5.11 What he #! used to recite in the different prayers 

As for which surahs and ayat he used to recite in prayer, this varied ac¬ 
cording to the different prayers. The details now follow, beginning with the 
first of the five prayers. 

Fajr Prayer 

He used to recite the longer mufassal 62 siirahs, 6i hence he (sometimes) 
recited al-Wdqiah (Quran, 56) and similar surahs in two rak‘ahs. M 

He £gs recited from al-Tur (Quran, 52) during the Farewell Pilgrimage. 65 
Sometimes he > would recite Qdf (Quran, 50) or similar to it in the first 
rak'ah. 66 

Sometimes he |§| would recite the shorter mufassal siirahs , such as «When 
the sun is folded up.» (Quran, 81). 67 

Once, he §§| recited «When the Earth is shaken.® (Quran, 99) in both 
rak'ahs, so that the narrator said, “I do not know whether the Messenger of 
Allah forgot or recited it on purpose.” 68 

Once, on a journey, he recited, «Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of the 
Daybreak.® (Quran, 113) and «Say: I seek refuge with the Lord of Mankind.® 
(Quran, 114) , 69 He also said to ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir i%, “Recite the muaw- 
wadhatayn 70 in your prayer, for no seeker of refuge has sought refuge by 
means of anything like them.” 71 

Sometimes he used to recite more than that: “He would recite sixty 
ayat or more” 72 —one of the narrators said, “I do not know whether this 
was in each rak'ah or in total.” 

He §§:• used to recite al-Riim (Quran, 30) 73 and sometimes Yd Sin (Quran, 

3 d ). 74 


Recitation 


49 


Once, he ■ prayed the Subh [i.e. Fajr Prayer] in Makkah and started 
reciting al-Mu’minun (Quran, 23) until, when he got to the mention of 
Musa and Harun or the mention of ‘Isa 75 —one of the narrators was not 
sure—he started coughing and so made ruku. 76 

Sometimes, he gfis would lead them in Fajr with al-Sdjfdt (Quran, 77) , 77 

In Fajr on Friday, he would recite al-Sajdah (Quran, 32) [in the first 
rak‘ab\ and al-Dabr (Quran, 76) [in the second]. 78 

He S§ used to make the first rak‘ab longer than the second. 79 

Recitation in the Sunnah prayer before Fajr 

His if! recitation in the two rak'ahs of snnnah in Fajr used to be extremely 
short, 80 so much so that ‘A’ishah «§& used to say, “Has he recited Surah al- 
Fdtihah or not?” 81 

Sometimes, after al-Fdtibab, he ij! would recite the ayah «Say: We believe 
in Allah and the revelation given to us...» (Quran, 2:136) in the first rak‘ab\ 
in the second, the ayah «Say: O People of the Book! Come to common terms 
as between us and you...» (Quran, 3:64). 82 

Occasionally, he would recite instead of the latter, «When ‘Isa found 
unbelief on their part...» (Quran, 3:52). 83 

Sometimes he |§| would recite al-Kdfiriin (Quran, 109) in the first rak‘ah, 
and Stirab al-Ikblds (Quran, 112) in the second; 84 also, he if§ used to say, “An 
excellent pair of sfirabs they are!” 85 He heard a man reciting the former 
surah in the first rak‘ah, so he said, “This is a slave who believes in his Lord.” 
Then the man recited the latter siirah in the second rak‘ab, so he said, “This 
is a slave who knows his Lord.” 86 


Recitation 


50 


Zuhr Prayer 

He ®§§ used to recite al-Fdtihah and two surahs in the first two rak \dhs , making 
the first one longer than the second. 87 

Sometimes he would make lengthen it to the extent that the Zuhr 
prayer would have started, and someone could go to a plain ( al-Baqi ), fulfill 
his need, [come back to his place,] make his ablution, and then come (to 
the mosque) while the Messenger of Allah was still in the first rak‘ah\ it 
was that long. 88 Also, they used to think that he did it so that the people 
could catch the first rak'ahA 9 

He IfJ used to recite in each of these two rak ‘ah about thirty ay at, such as 
al-Fdtihah followed by al-Sajdah (Quran, 32). 90 

Sometimes he -y would recite «By the Sky and the Night-Visitant.» (Qu¬ 
ran, 86), «By the Sky, (displaying) the Constellations.» (Quran, 85), «By the 
Night as it conceals.* (Quran, 92) and similar siirahs ? 1 

Occasionally, he recited «When the Sky is rent asunder.* (Quran, 84) 
and similar ones. 92 

They could tell that he was reciting in Zuhr and ‘Asr from the move¬ 
ment of his beard. 93 

Recitation of ay at after al-Fatihah in the last two rak ‘ahs 

He |j§ used to make the last two rak'ahs about half as long as the first 
two, about fifteen dydt, 9A and sometimes he would recite only al-Fdtihah 
in them. 95 

Sometimes he |§s would let them hear an ayah or so. 96 
They would hear the tones of his recitation of «Glorify the name of 
your Lord Most High.* (Quran, 87) and «Has the story reached you of the 
Overwhelming?* (Quran, 88).” 97 


Recitation 


5i 


Sometimes he i§ would recite «By the Sky and the Night-Visitant* (Qu¬ 
ran, 86), «By the Sky, (displaying) the Constellations* (Quran, 8 5), and sim¬ 
ilar siirabs , 98 

Sometimes he would recite «By the Night as it conceals.* (Quran, 92) 
and similar surahs 

Asr Prayer 

He |§3 used to recite al-Fdtihah and two (other) surahs in the first two rak'ahs, 
making the first one longer than the second, 100 and they used to think that 
he |§J did it so that the people could catch the rak‘ah . 101 

He - used to recite about fifteen ay at in each of the first two rak'ahs, 
about half as much as he recited in each of the first two rak'ahs of Zuhr, and 
he used to make the last two rak'ahs about half as long the first two. 102 

He /. used to recite al-Fdtihah in the last two. 103 He §§ would let them 
hear an ayah or so sometimes. 104 

He |§J used to recite the surahs mentioned under Zuhr Prayer. 

Maghrib Prayer 

He used to (sometimes) recite the short mufassal surahs, 105 so that when 
they had finished praying with him, they could go away and (it was possible 
to) shoot an arrow and see where it landed. 106 Once, while on a journey, he 
§§ recited «By the Fig and the Olive.* (Quran, 95) in the second rak‘ah. 107 

But sometimes he § would recite the long or medium mufassal surahs, 
hence he |§| would recite «Those who disbelieve and hinder (men) from the 
Path of Allah...* (Quran, 47); 108 or al-Tur (Quran, 52), 109 or al-Mursaldt 
(Quran, 77), which he recited in the last prayer he prayed. 110 


Recitation 


5^ 

Sometimes he ifj would recite the longer of the two long surahs 111 (Quran, 
7) [in two rak'ahs}. 112 Or he would recite al-Anfdl (Quran, 8) in two 
rak‘ahs. lli 

Recitation in the Sunnah prayer after Maghrib 

In this prayer, he used to recite «Say: O you who reject faith...» (Quran, 
109) and «Say: He is Allah, the One and Only.» (Quran, 112). 114 

‘Isha Prayer 

He ; would recite the medium mufassal surahs in the first two rak'ahs , 115 
hence he used to recite «By the Sun and its splendor...* (Quran, 91) and 
surahs like it. 116 

Or he would recite «When the Sky is rent asunder...* (Quran, 84) 
and make sajdah during it. 117 Also, he S§ once recited «By the Fig and the 
Olive.* (Quran, 95) [in the first rak‘ah\ while on a journey. 118 

He it* forbade prolonging of recitation in ‘Isha, and that was when: 

Mu‘adh bin Jabal led his people in Isha prayer, and made it 
very long for them, so one of the Ansar left and prayed (alone). 

When Mu‘adh ift, was informed about this, he said, “He is 
surely a hypocrite.” When the man heard of this, he went to the 
Messenger of Allah and told him what Mu'adh had said, 
so the Prophet |j§ said to him, “Do you want to be one who 
causes a lot of trouble, Mu'adh?! When you lead the people, 
recite «By the Sun and its splendor* (Quran, 91) or «Glorify 
the Name of your Lord Most High.* (Quran, 77) or «Read in 
the Name of your Lord.* (Quran, 96) or «By the Night as it 


Recitation 


53 


conceals.» (Quran, 92) [because the old, the weak and those 
who have a need to fulfill pray behind you].” 119 

Tahajjud Prayer 

He if| would sometimes recite loudly in it and sometimes quietly. 120 He |§| 
would shorten his recitation in this sometimes and lengthen it sometimes, 
occasionally making it so exceedingly long that ‘Abd Allah bin Mas'ud 
once said, “I prayed with the Prophet |§J one night, and he carried on stand¬ 
ing for so long that I was struck by a wrong idea.” He was asked, “What was 
this idea?” He said, “I thought I would sit and leave the Prophet |f§!” 121 
Also Hudhayfah bin al-Yaman lift, said, 


I prayed with the Prophet |§| that night when he started Stirah 
al-Baqarah (Quran, 2). So I said (to myself), “He will make 
ruku ' after one hundred ayat .” But he carried on, so I thought, 

“He will finish it (i.e. the surah) in two rak'ahs .” But he carried 
on, so I thought, “He will make ruku when he has finished it.” 

Then he started Stirah al-Nisa (Quran, 4) and recited it all, then 
he started Surah Al 'Imran (Quran, 3) 122 and recited it all. He 
was reciting slowly; when he came to an ayah in which there 
was glorification of Allah, he glorified Allah; at an ayah which 
had something to be asked for, he asked for it; at mention of 
seeking refuge, he sought refuge (with Allah). Then he made 
ruku '... (to the end of the hadith.) 123 

Also, one night when he was ill he recited the Seven Long Surahs. 124 

Also, he ; would (sometimes) recite one of these surahs in each rak'ah . 125 


Recitation 


54 


It was [totally] unknown for him to recite the whole Quran in one 
night. 126 In fact, he i§ did not recommend it for ‘Abd Allah bin ‘Amr iSfj, 
when he said to him, “Recite the whole Quran in each month.” I said, “I 
have the power (to do more than that).” He said, “Recite it in twenty 
nights.” I said, “I have the power to do more.” He said, “Then recite it 
in seven days and do not go beyond that.” 12 ” Then he allowed him to 
recite it in five days. 128 Then he allowed him to recite it in three days. 129 
Further, he forbade him from reciting it in less time than that, 130 and he 
gave a reason for that by saying to him, “Whoever recites the Quran in less 
than three days does not understand it.” 131 In another version: “He does not 
understand, the one who recites the Quran in less than three days.” 132 Also 
when he - said to him, “For every worshiper has a (period of) keenness 133 
and every (period of) keenness has a lapse, 134 either towards a snnnah or 
towards a bid‘ah (innovation); so he whose lapse is towards a snnnah has 
found guidance, and he whose lapse is towards other than that has been 
destroyed.” 135 For this reason, he would not recite the whole Quran in 
less than three days. 136 

He |§J used to say, “Whoever prays at night reciting two hundred dyat 
will be written down as one of the sincere devotees.” 137 Also, he |§J used to 
recite Bani Isrd ’il (Quran, 17) and al-Znmar (Quran, 3 9) every night. 138 He 
HI also used to say, “Whoever prays at night reciting a hundred dyat will not 
be written down as one of the heedless.” 139 Sometimes he : . would recite 
about fifty dyat or more in each rak'ah , 140 or he would recite about as much 
as al-Mnzzammil (Quran, 73). 141 

He : . would not pray all through the night 142 except rarely, for once: 

Khabbab bin al-Arat—who was present at (the Battle of) Badr 
with the Messenger of Allah ®|* —stayed up the whole night 
with the Messenger of Allah |§J (in another version: a night 


Recitation 


55 


when he prayed throughout it) until it was dawn. So when he 
|§§ finished his prayer, Khabbab said to him, “O Messen¬ 
ger of Allah, may my father and mother be sacrificed for you! 
Tonight, you have prayed a prayer the like of which I have never 
seen?” He said, “Yes, it was a prayer of hope and fear; [in¬ 
deed] I asked my Lord, Almighty and Sublime, three things; 

He granted me two, but refused me one. I asked my Lord that 
He would not destroy us the way the nations before us were (in 
another version: that He would not destroy my Ummah with 
famine) and He granted me this; I asked my Lord, Almighty 
and Sublime, that He would not impose on us an enemy from 
outside us, and He granted me this; and I asked my Lord not 
to cover us with confusion in party strife, but He refused me 
this.” 143 

Also, one night he stood (in prayer) repeating one ayah until it was dawn: 

«IfYou should punish them-indeed they are Your servants; but 
if You forgive them—indeed it is You who is The Exalted in 
Might, the Wise.» (Quran, 5:118) [with it he bowed, with it he 
prostrated, and with it he supplicated], [so in the morning Abu 
Dharr said to him, “O Messenger of Allah, you did not stop 
reciting this ayah until it was morning; you bowed with it and 
you prostrated with it] [and you supplicated with it,] [whereas 
Allah has taught you the whole Quran;] [if one of us were to 
do this, we would be stern with him?]”[He :: said: “Indeed 
I asked my Lord, the Almighty and Sublime, for intercession 
for my Ummah. He granted it to me, and it will be possible 


Recitation 


56 


if Allah wills for whoever does not associate any partners with 

Allah.”] 144 

A man said to him f§, "O Messenger of Allah, I have a neighbor who 
stands (in prayer) at night and does not recite anything except «Say: He is 
Allah the One and Only» (Quran, 112), [repeating it,] [not adding anything 
else,]” as if he considered it little. So the Prophet said, “By Him in Whose 
Hand is my soul, it is worth a third of the Quran.” 145 

Witr Prayer 

He used to recite «Glorify the Name of Your Lord Most High.» (Quran, 

87) in the first rak‘ah, «Say: O you who disbelieves (Quran, 109) in the sec¬ 
ond, and «Say: He is Allah the One and Only» (Quran, 112) in the third. 146 
Sometimes he would add on to the last one, «Say: I seek refuge with 
the Lord of Daybreaks (Quran, 113) and «Say: I seek refuge with the Lord 
of Mankinds (Quran, 114). 147 Once, he : recited a hundred dydt from 
al-Nisd (Quran, 4) in the third rak‘ah. l4s 

As for the two rak‘ahs after witr, 149 he used to recite «When the earth 
is shakens (Quran, 99) and «Say: O you who disbelieves (Quran, 109) in 
them. 150 

Friday Prayer 

He Ip would sometimes recite al-]nmu ‘ah (Quran, 62) in the first rak ‘ah and 
<When the hypocrites come to you...s (Quran, 63) 151 in the second, some¬ 
times reciting «Has the story reached you of the Overwhelmingps (Quran, 

88) instead of the latter. 152 Or sometimes he would recite «Glorify the 


Recitation 


57 


Name of your Lord Most High.» (Quran, 87) in the first rak'ah and «Has 
the story reached you...» (Quran, 88) in the second. 153 

Eid Prayer 

He would (sometimes) recite «Glorify the Name of your Lord Most 
High.» (Quran, 87) in the first rak‘ah and «Has the story reached you...» 
(Quran, 88) in the second. 154 Or sometimes he would recite in them 
«Qdf. By the Glorious Quran.» (Quran, 50) and «The Hour has drawn near* 
(Quran, 54). 155 

Funeral Prayer 

The Sunnah is to recite al-Fdtibab 156 [and another siirah\ in it. 157 Also, he 
would be silent for a while, after the first takbir , 158 

5.12. Tartil and making the voice beautiful when reciting 

He used to recite the Quran in slow, measured rhythmic tones as Allah 
had instructed him, not racing or hurrying; rather, his was a recitation 
clearly-distinguishing each letter, 159 so much so that he would recite a siirab 
in such slow rhythmic tones that it would be longer than would seem possi¬ 
ble. 160 

He also used to say, “It will be said to the reciter of the Quran (on 
the Day of Judgment), ‘Recite and ascend; recite slowly and rhythmically as 
you used to do in the previous world; your place will be at the last ayah you 
recite.’ ” 161 


Recitation 


58 


He S§§ used to prolong his recitation (at a letter which can be prolonged), 
such as at Bism Allah , at al-Rahmdn, at al-Rahim , 162 and at nadid (Quran, 
50:10) 163 and their like. 

He : used to stop at the end of an ayah, as has already been explained. 164 

Sometimes he - would recite in an attractive vibrating tone, 165 as he did 
on the Day of the Conquest of Makkah, when, while on his she-camel, he 
recited al-Fath (Quran, 48) [very softly], 166 and ‘Abd Allah bin Mughaffal 
i|§a narrated this attractive tone thus: TTT. 167 

He used to command making one’s voice beautiful when reciting the 
Quran, saying, “Beautify the Quran with your voices [for a fine voice in¬ 
creases the Quran in beauty]” 168 and, “Truly, the one who has one of the 
finest voices among the people for reciting the Quran is the one whom you 
think fears Allah when you hear him recite.” 169 

He m also used to command recitation of the Quran in a pleasant tone, 
saying, “Study the Book of Allah; recite it repeatedly; acquire (memorize) it; 
and recite it in a melodious tone, for by Him in whose Hand is my soul, it 
runs away quicker than camels from their tying ropes.” 170 

He |! also used to say, “He who does not recite the Quran in a pleasant 
tone is not of us,” 171 and “Allah does not listen to anything as he listens 
(in some versions: as he is listening) to a prophet [with a nice voice, and 
in one version: with a nice melody] who recites the Quran in a pleasant 
tone 172 [loudly].” 173 

He §§ said to Abu Musa al-Ash‘ari “Had you seen me while I was 
listening to your recitation yesterday! You have surely been given one of the 
musical wind instruments 174 of the family of Dawud!” [So Abu Musa 
said, “Had I known you were there, I would have made my voice more pleas¬ 
ant and emotional for you.”] 175 


Recitation 


59 


5.13 Correcting the Imam 

He ; set the example of correcting the Imam when his recitation becomes 
mixed up, when once he prayed, reciting loudly, and his recitation became 
mixed up, so when he finished, he said to Ubayy d %, “Did you pray with us?” 
He replied, “Yes.” He |§ said, “So what prevented you [from correcting 
me]?” 176 

5.14 Seeking refuge and spitting lightly during prayer in 
order to repel temptation 

‘Uthman bin Abl al-As d§s said to him Iff, “O Messenger of Allah! The devil 
comes between me and my prayer and confuses me in my recitation!” So the 
Messenger of Allah said, “That is a devil called Khinzab, so when you 
sense his presence, seek refuge with Allah from him, and spit lightly 177 on 
your left three times.” He ift, said, “So when I did that, Allah caused him 
to go away from me.” 178 


Endnotes 

1. The three Arabic words hamz, nafkb, and naftb, were interpreted such 
by the narrator; all three interpretations are also traced back to the 
Prophet : with a sahib mursal isnad. By “poetry,” what is meant is 
the vain kind, for the Prophet 7 said: “Truly, some poetry is wisdom.” 
(Al-Bukharl) 

2. Abu Dawud, Ibn Majah, al-Daraqutnl, and al-Hakim who, along 
with Ibn Hibban and al-Dhahabl, declared it sahib. It is given along 
with the next one in Irwd al-Gbalil (#342). 

3. Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhl with a basan isnad. Ahmad endorsed it 
(.Masd ’il Ibn Hdni, 1/50). 

4. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, al-TahawI, and Ahmad. 

5. Abu Dawud and al-Sahmi (64-65); Al-Hakim declared it sahib and 
al-Dhahabl concurred. It is given in Irwd al-Gbalil (#343). Abu ‘Amr 
al-Danl transmitted it in al-Muktafd (5 /2) and said: “This baditb has 
many routes, and it is what is depended upon in this regard, and sev¬ 
eral of the past Imams and reciters preferred to stop at every verse, even 
if some were connected (in meaning) to the one after.” I say: This is 


60 


Recitation 


6 1 


a simnah which has been neglected by the majority of the reciters of 
this age, let alone others. 

6. Tammam al-RazI in al-Fawa’id, Ibn Abi Dawud in al-Masdhif (7/2), 
Abu Nu'aym in Akhbdr Isbahdn (1/104) and al-Hakim who declared 
it sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. Both of these recitations are mu- 
tawdtir. 

7. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, Abu Awanah, and al-Bayhaql. It is given in Irwd 
al-Ghalil (#302). 

8. Al-Daraqutnl, who declared it sahih, and Ibn Hibban in his Sahih. It 
is also in Irwd al-Ghalil (#302). 

9. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

o. i.e. Surah al-Fdtihah. It is an example of the wording including the 
whole prayer but intending only a part, as a way of emphasis on that 
part. 

1. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and Malik. Al-Sahml has a supporting hadith 
of Jabir in Tdrikh Jurjdn (144). 

2. Al-BajI said: “He is referring to the saying of The Exalted «And We 
have bestowed upon you seven of the Oft-Repeated and the Grand 
Recitation.» (Quran, 15:87). It is named th e. seven because it has seven 
verses, and oft-repeated because it is repeated again and again in prayer. 
It has been called the grand recitation to specify this name for it, even 
though every part of the Quran is a grand recitation; similarly, the 
Ka ‘hah is the House of Allah even though all houses belong to Allah; 
this is by way of specifying it and emphasizing its importance.” 



Recitation 


62 


13. Al-Nasa’I and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

14. Al-Bukharl in his article on Recitation behind the Imam with a sahih 
isnad. 

15. Abu Dawud, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/80/2), al-Hakim, and al-Tabarani. 
Ibn Hibban along with al-Hakim declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl 
concurred. It is in Irwd al-Ghalil (#303). 

16. Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhl, who declared it hasan-, its isnad is sahih 
{Sahih Abi Dawud, #807). 

17. Arabic hadhdham reciting quickly, implying racing or hurrying. 

18. Al-Bukharl in his pamphlet, Abu Dawud, and Ahmad. Al-Tirmidhl 
and al-Daraqutnl declared it hasan. 

19. Malik, al-Humaydl, al-Bukharl in his pamphlet, Abu Dawud and al- 
Mahamali (6/139/1). Al-Tirmidhl declared it hasan-, Abu Hatim al- 
Razi, Ibn Hibban, and Ibn Qayyim declared it sahih. 

20. Ibn Abi Shaybah (1/97/1), Abu Dawud, Muslim, Abu Awanah, and 
al-Ruwayanl in his Musnad (24/119/1). It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil 
(#332., #394). 

21. Ibn Abi Shaybah (1/97/1), al-Daraqutnl, Ibn Majah, al-TahawI, and 
Ahmad from numerous routes, musnad and mursal. Shaykh al-Islam 
Ibn Taymiyyah declared it strong, as in al-Furu of Ibn Abd al-Hadl 
(48/2). Al-BusayrI declared some of its isnads sahih. I have discussed 
it in detail and investigated its routes of narration in the manuscript 
version and then in Irwd al-Ghalil (#500). 



Recitation 


63 


22. Ibn Majah with a sahih isnad. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#506). 

23. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and al-Siraj. 

24. Al-Bukhari in his article, Ahmad, and al-Siraj with a hasan isnad. 

25. Malik and al-Bukharl in Af‘dl al- ‘Ibad with a sahih isnad. 

Note: The view of the validity of recitation behind the Imam in quiet 
but not loud prayers was taken by Imam al-Shafi‘1 initially, and by 
Muhammad the student of Abu Hanlfah in a narration from him 
which was preferred by Shaykh ‘All al-Qarl and other shaykhs of the 
madhhab\ it was also the position of the Imams: al-Zuhri, Malik, Ibn 
al-Mubarak, Ahmad ibn Hanbal, several of the mnhaddithin, and it is 
the preference of Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah. 

26. Al-TirmidhI and Ibn Majah with a sahih isnad. Transmitted also by al- 
Ajurri in Adab Hamalah al-Qur’dn. As for the haditb, “He who recites 
behind the Imam, his mouth is filled with fire,” it is mawdu (fabri¬ 
cated) and this is explained in Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Da‘ifah (#569)— 
see Appendix E. 

27. Al-Bukhari in Jnz al-Qird‘ah and Abu Dawud with a sahih isnad. 

28. Al-Bukhari, Muslim, al-Nasa’i, and al-Dariml; the additional word¬ 
ings are reported by the latter two, and prove that this haditb can¬ 
not justify that the Imam does not say dmin, as reported from Malik; 
hence, Ibn Hajar says in Fath al-Bdri, “It clearly shows that the Imam 
says dmin” Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr says in al- Tamhid (7/13), “It is the view of 
the majority of the Muslims, including Malik as the people of Madl- 
nah report from him, for it is authentic from Allah’s Messenger 


Recitation 


64 


through the ahadith of Abu Hurayrah (i.e. this one) and that of Wa’il 
bin Hujr (i.e. the previous one).” 

29. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

30. Al-Bukharl in al-Adab al-Mufrad, Ibn Majah, Ibn Khuzaymah, Ah¬ 
mad, and al-Siraj with two sahib isnads. 

Note: The dmin of the congregation behind the Imam should be done 
loudly and simultaneously with the Imam, not before him as the ma¬ 
jority of worshipers do, nor after him. This is what I finally find most 
convincing, as I have explained in some of my works, among them Sil- 
silah al-Ahadith al-Da‘ifah (vol. 2, #952) which has been printed and 
published by the grace of Allah, and Sahih al-Targhib wa al-Tarhib 
(1/205). See Appendix F. 

31. Ahmad with a sahih isnad\ the other hadith was transmitted by Ibn 
Abi Dawud in al-Masdhif (4/14/2). This and other similar ahadith 
contain permission for infants to enter the mosque. As for the hadith 
on many lips: “Keep your small children away from your mosques.. 

it is da if and cannot be used for proof at all; among those who have 
declared it da if are Ibn al-jawzl, al-Mundhirl, al-Haytaml, Ibn Hajar 
al-‘AsqalanI, and al-Busayrl. ‘Abd al-Haqq al-Ishblli said, “It is base¬ 
less.” 

3 2. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

33. There are many ahadith mentioned further on which prove this. 

34. Ibn Abi Shaybah (1/100/1), Ahmad, and ‘Abd al-Ghanl al-MaqdisI 
in his Sunan (9/2) with a sahih isnad. 



Recitation 


65 


35. Ibn Nasr and al-TahawI with a sahib isnad\ I take the meaning of the 
hadith as: “Make every rak'ah have a complete surah!’ The order is one 
of preference, not compulsion, from the evidence which follows. 

36. Ahmad and Abu Ya‘la from two routes. Also see Recitation in Fajr 
prayer. 

37. As he did in Fajr, as will follow. 

38. Details and sources will follow shortly. 

39. i.e. a surah after al-Fatihah. 

40. Al-Bukharl as taliq and al-Tirmidhl as mawsul , and he declared it 
sahih. 

41. Al-Nazd ’ir: sfirahs which are similar in meaning, e.g. they both contain 
advice, commandments, or stories. 

42. These are agreed to end at the end of the Quran; the soundest view is 
that they begin with Surah Qaf. 

43. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

44. The first number is that of the siirah, while the second is the number 
of ayat in the siirah. By inspecting the first of the two numbers in 
each case, it is easy to see that in many of these combinations, he i_ ; 
did not stick to the Quranic order of the surahs, so this is evidence 
for the permissibility of doing this, even though it is better to follow 
the sequence of the Quran. A similar case is to be found later under 
Tahajjud Prayer. 


Recitation 


66 


45. Muslim and al-TahawI. 

46. Abu Dawud and al-Bayhaql with a sahib isnad. This hadith is general, 
so it applies to both recitation during prayer, whether voluntary or 
obligatory, and outside it. Ibn Abi Shaybah (2/132/2) has transmitted 
from Abu Musa al-Ash‘arI and al-Mughirah bin Shu'bah [|§| that they 
used to say this in obligatory prayers, and from ‘Umar and ‘All iSfj, 
without such specification. 

47. In the original, “the young man said.” 

48. Arabic dandanab. when someone speaks some words such that their 
intonation is audible but they cannot be understood; it is a little bit 
more than murmuring. ( Nihayah ) 

49. Ibn Khuzaymah in his Sahih (1634) and al-Bayhaql with a sahih is- 
nad. It has a supporting narration in Abu Dawud ( Sahih Abi Dawiid , 
#758) and the basic story is in al-Bukharl and Muslim. The first ad¬ 
dition is in one narration of Muslim, the second in Ahmad (5/74), 
and the third and fourth in al-Bukharl. Also under this heading is 
the hadith on the authority of Ibn ‘Abbas igfi: “that the Messenger 
of Allah If! prayed two rak'ahs in which he recited only al-Fdtihah ,” 
transmitted by Ahmad (1/282), al-Harith bin Abi Usamah in his Mus- 
nad (p. 38 of its Zawaid ) and al-Bayhaql (2/62) with a da‘if isnad. I 
used to declare this hadith hasan in previous works, until I realized 
that I had been mistaken, because this hadith depends on Hanzalah 
al-DawsI, who is da if, and I do not know how this was unknown 
to me; maybe I thought he was someone else. Anyway, praise is due 
to Allah who guided me to recognize my mistake, and that is why I 
hurried to correct it in print. Then Allah compensated me with this 


Recitation 


67 


better baditb of Mu'adh which relates to what the baditb of Ibn 
‘Abbas is|§g indicated. Praise be to Allah by whose Grace good actions 
are completed. 

50. There is ijmd (consensus of opinion) of the Muslims on this, with 
successors passing it on from the predecessors, along with authentic 
abaditb which establish this, as al-NawawI has said, and some of them 
follow. See also Irwd al-Gbalil (#345). 

51. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

5 2. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

5 3. See the sections on his recitation in Friday Prayer and the Eid Prayer 
[both of them]. 

54. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

55. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

56. ‘Abd al-Haqq al-Ishblll said in al-Saldh wa al-Tabajjud (p. 244): 

As for voluntary prayers during the day, there is noth¬ 
ing authentic from him regarding either quiet or loud 
recitation, but it would seem that he used to recite quietly 
during them. It is reported from him |§| that once, during 
the daytime, he passed by ‘Abd Allah bin Hudhayfah 
who was praying and reciting loudly, so he said to him: 

“O ‘Abd Allah, let Allah hear, not us.” But this baditb is 
not strong. 


Recitation 


68 


57. Muslim and al-Bukharl in Af'dlal-‘Ibdd. 

58. Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhl in Sbamd’il with a hasan isndd. The 
hadith means that he used to moderate between quietness and 
loudness. 

59. Al-Nasa’I, al-Tirmidhl in Shamd’il, and al-Bayhaql in Dald’il with a 
hasan isndd. 

Go. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahib, and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

61. Ibid. 

62. The last seventh of the Quran, beginning with Surah Qdf according 
to the soundest view, as before. 

63. Al-Nasa’i and Ahmad with a sahib isndd. 

64. Ahmad, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/69/1), and al-Hakim who judged it sahib 
and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

65. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

66. Muslim and al-Tirmidhl. It is given along with the next one in Irwd 
al-Ghalil (#345). 

67. Muslim and Abu Dawud. 

68. Abu Dawud and al-Bayhaql with a sahib isndd. And what is apparent 
is that he did it on purpose to establish its validity. 


Recitation 


69 


69. Abu Dawud, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/76/1), Ibn Bushran in al-Amdli and 
Ibn Abi Shaybah (12/176/1); Al-Hakim declared it sahih and al-Dha- 
habl concurred. 

70. litreally “the two by means of which refuge is sought,” i.e. the last two 
surahs of the Quran, both beginning «Say: I seek refuge...» 

71. Abu Dawud and Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 

72. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

73. Al-Nasa’I, Ahmad, and Bazzar with a good isnad. 

74. Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 

75. Musa is mentioned in ayah 45: «Then We sent Musa and his brother 
Harun, with our signs and manifest authority.# ‘Isa is mentioned soon 
after in ayah 50: «And We made the son of Maryam and his mother 
as a sign—we gave them both shelter on high ground, affording rest 
and security and furnished with springs.# 

76. Muslim and al-Bukhari in ta‘liq form. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil 
(# 397 )- 

77. Ahmad and Abu Ya‘la in their Musnads, and al-MaqdisI in al-Mukhtd- 
rah. 

78. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

79. Ibid. 

80. Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 



Recitation 


70 


81. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

82. Muslim, Ibn Khuzaymah, and al-Hakim. 

8 3. Muslim and Abu Dawud. 

84. Ibid. 

85. Ibn Majah and Ibn Khuzaymah. 

86. Al-Tahawl, Ibn Hibban in his Sahih, and Ibn Bushran. Ibn Hajar 
declared it hasan in al-Ahadith al-Aliy at (#16). 

87. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

88. Muslim and al-Bukharl in Juz al-Qird’ah. 

89. Abu Dawud with a sahih isnad and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/165/1). 

90. Ahmad and Muslim. 

91. Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhl, and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/67/2); the latter 
two declared it sahih. 

92. Ibn Khuzaymah in his Sahih (1/67/2). 

93. Al-Bukhari and Abu Dawud. 

94. Ahmad and Muslim. The hadith contains evidence that reciting more 
than al-Fdtihah in the last two rak'ahs is a sunnah, and many Com¬ 
panions did so, among them Abu Bakr al-Siddlq i%. It is also the 
view of Imam al-Shafi‘I, whether in Zuhr or others, and of our later 
scholars, Abu al-Hasanat al-LaknawI took it in Notes on Muhammad’s 
al-Muwattd (p. 102) and said: 



Recitation 


7 i 


Some of our companions take hold a very strange view in 
obligating a sajdah al-sahw (prostration for forgetfulness) 
for the recitation of a siirah in the last two rak'ahs, but the 
commentators on al-Maniyyah, Ibn Amir Hajj, Ibrahim al- 
Halabl, and others, have refuted this view extremely well. 

There is no doubt that those who said this were unaware of 
the haditb, and had it reached them they would not have 
said so. 

95. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

96. Ibn Khuzaymah in his Sahib (1/67/2) and al-Diya al-MaqdisI in al- 
Mnkhtdrah with a sahib isnad. 

97. Al-Bukharl in Juz al-Qiraab and al-Tirmidhi, who declared it sahib. 

98. Muslim and al-TayalisI. 

99. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

too. Ibid. 

101. Abu Dawud with a sahib isnad and Ibn Khuzaymah. 

102. Ahmad and Muslim. 

103. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

104. Ibid. 

105. Ibid. 



Recitation 


72 


106. Al-Nasa’I and Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 

107. Al-TayalisI and Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 

108. Ibn Khuzaymah (1/166/2), al-Tabaranl, and al-MaqdisI with a sahih 
isnad. 

109. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

no. Ibid. 

in. Called al-Tawilatayn\ al-A‘rdf (Quran, 7) is agreed to be one; al- 
An ‘dm (Quran, 6) is the other, according to the most correct saying, 
as in Fath al-Bdri. 

112. Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/68/1), Ahmad, al-Siraj, 
and al-Mukhlis. 

113. Al-Tabaranl in Mu jam al-Kabir with a sahih isnad. 

114. Ahmad, al-MaqdisI, al-Nasa’I, Ibn Nasr, and al-Tabaranl. 

115. Al-Nasa’i and Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 

116. Ahmad and al-Tirmidhl who declared it hasan. 

117. Al-Bukhari, Muslim, and al-Nasa’I. 

118. Ibid. 

119. Ibid. It is also given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#295). 

120. Al-Nasa’I with a sahih isnad. 



Recitation 


73 


121. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

122. The narration is like this, with al-Nisd before 71 / ‘Imran, and thus it is 
evidence for (the permissibility of) departing from the order of surahs 
found in the ‘UthmanI copy of the Quran in recitation. An example 
of this has already been seen. 

123. Muslim and al-Nasa’I. 

124. Abu Ya‘la and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. Ibn al-Athlr says: “...the Seven Long Surahs are al-Baqarah 
(Quran, 2), Al ‘Imran (Quran, 3), al-Nisd (Quran, 4), al-Ma’idah (Qu¬ 
ran, 5), al-An‘dm (Quran, 6), al-A‘rdf (Quran, 7) and al-Tawbah (Qu¬ 
ran, 9).” 

125. Abu Dawud and al-Nasa’I with a sahih isnad. 

126. Muslim and Abu Dawud. 

127. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

128. Al-Nasa’I and al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahih. 

129. Al-Bukhari and Ahmad. 

130. Al-DarimI and Sa‘ld bin Mansur in his Sunan with a sahih isnad. 

131. Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 

132. Al-DarimI and al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahih. 

133. Arabic shirrah. excitement, enthusiasm, keenness, energy. The shirrah 
of youth is its beginning and its fervor. Imam al-TahawI says: 



Recitation 


74 


This is the zeal of the Muslims in their actions which bring 
them nearer to their Lord. However they are bound to fall 
short and leave some actions (which they began due to 
this zeal) so the most beloved of their actions to Allah’s 
Messenger |§J were those done otherwise (and kept up), 
so he ordered them to carry out righteous deeds which 
they are able to do continually and keep to until they meet 
their Lord, Almighty and Majestic. It is narrated from him 
i§| to clarify this that he said: “The actions most loved by 
Allah are those which are the most regular, even if they are 
little.” 

I say: this hadith which he prefixes with the words “it is narrated” is 
sahib, agreed upon by al-Bukharl and Muslim from the narration of 
‘A’ishah «§a. 

134. Arabic fatrafr. interval, break, lapse; referring here to a period of re¬ 
duced enthusiasm. 

135. Ahmad and Ibn Hibban in his Sahih. 

136. Ibn Sa'ad (1/376) and Abu Shaykh in Akhldq al-Nabi (281). 

137. Al-DarimI and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

138. Ibid. 

139. Ahmad and Ibn Nasr with a sahih isnad. 


140. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 


Recitation 


75 


141. Ahmad and Abu Dawud with a sahih isnad. 

142. Muslim and Abu Dawud. This hadith and others make it disliked 
(;makriih ) to stay awake the whole night, whether always or regularly, 
for it is against the example of the Prophet 34 for if staying up the 
whole night were better, he ifj would have done so, and the best guid¬ 
ance is the guidance ofMuhammad i§. So do not be deceived by what 
is narrated from Abu Hanlfah that he prayed Fajr with the ablution 
of 'Ishd for forty years! (Translator’s Note: see Tablighi Nisdb: Virtues 
ofSaldb by Mawlana Zakariyya Kandhalvi for examples of this type of 
claim) For this narration from him is totally baseless; in fact ‘Allamah 
al-Fayruz‘abadI says in al-Radd ‘aid al-Midtarid (44/1): 

This narration is a clear lie and cannot be attributed to the 
Imam, for there is nothing excellent about it, whereas it 
was the nature of the likes of the Imam to do the better 
thing; there is no doubt that the renewal of purification 
for each prayer is more excellent, most complete, and best. 

This is even if it is correct that he stayed awake the length 
of the night for forty consecutive years! This story seems 
more like a fairy tale, and is an invention of some of the 
extremely ignorant fanatics, who say it about Abu Hanlfah 
and others, and all of it is lies. 

143. Al-Nasa’I, Ahmad, and al-Tabaranl (1/187/2); Al-TirmidhI declared 
it sahih. 

144. Al-Nasa’I, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/70/1), Ahmad, Ibn Nasr, and al-Hakim 
who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 


Recitation 


76 


145. Al-Bukharl and Ahmad. 

146. Al-Nasa I and al-Hakim who declared it sahib. 

147. Al-Tirmidhl, Abu al-Abbas al-Asamm in his Hadithah (vol. 2, #117), 
and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

148. Al-Nasa I and Ahmad with a sahih isnad. 

149. The evidence for these two rak'ahs is found in Sahih Muslim and others 
as a practice of the Prophet A, but they oppose his saying: “Make the 
last of your prayer at night odd (witr),” transmitted by al-Bukharl and 
Muslim. The scholars have differed in reconciling these two hadith, 
none of them being convincing to me, so the most cautious thing 
is to leave the two rak'ahs in compliance with the command of the 
Prophet H§. Allah knows best. 

Later I came across an authentic hadith which had a command for two 
rak'ahs after witr, so the order of the Prophet ij§ agrees with his action, 
and the two rak'ahs are validated for everyone; the first command is 
thus one of recommendation, not negating the two rak\ahs. The latter 
hadith is given in Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah (1993). S ee Appendix 
G. 

150. Ahmad, Ibn Nasr, al-TahawI (1/202), Ibn Khuzaymah, and Ibn Hib- 
ban with a hasan sahih isnad. 

151. Muslim and Abu Dawud. It is given in Irwa al-Ghalil (#345). 

152. Ibid. 

153. Muslim and Abu Dawud. 


Recitation 


77 


154. Ibid. 

155. Ibid. 

156. This is the saying of Imam al-Shafi‘I, Ahmad, and Ishaq, and some of 
the later Hanafis also took this view. As for the recitation of a siirah 
after it, this is the view of some of the Shafi'is and it is the correct 
view. 

157. Al-Bukhari, Abu Dawud, al-Nasa I, and Ibn al-Jarud. The addition is 
not shadh (odd) as al-Tuwayjirl thinks. 

158. Al-Nasa I and al-TahawI with a sahih isnad. 

159. Ibn al-Mubarak in al-Zuhd (162/1, from al-Kawdkib, 575), Ahmad, 
and Abu Dawud with a sahih isnad. 

160. Muslim and Malik. 

161. Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahih. 

162. Al-Bukhari and Abu Dawud. 

163. Al-Bukhari in Af‘dlal-‘Ibad with a sahih isnad. 

164. In the section on Recitation of one ayah at a time. 

165. Arabic al-Tarji‘\ explained as a vibrating tone by Ibn Hajar; Al-Mana- 
wi said: “It arises from a feeling of joy and happiness, which he §f| felt 
a good deal on the day of the conquest of Makkah.” 

166. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 


Recitation 


78 


167. Ibid. Ibn Hajar said in his commentary on ( TIT ), “this is a hamzah 
with a fathah, followed by a silent alif, followed by another hamzah 
Shaykh All al-Qarl quoted likewise from others and then said: “It is 
obvious that this is three prolonged alifs” 

168. Al-Bukharl as ta‘liq, Abu Dawud, al-Dariml, al-Hakim and Tammam 
al-RazI with two sahib isnads. 

Note: This hadith was turned round by one of the narrators, who 
narrated it as “beautify your voices with the Quran.” This is a mis¬ 
take in narration and understanding, and whoever declared it sahib is 
submerged in error, for it contradicts the authentic explanatory narra¬ 
tions in this section. In fact, it is a prime example of a maqliib hadith, 
and the details of this brief note are in Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Da‘ifah 
(#532.8). 

169. A sahib hadith transmitted by Ibn al-Mubarak in al-Zuhd (162/1, 
from al-Kawdkih, 575), al-Dariml, Ibn Nasr, al-Tabaranl, al-Diya in 
al-Mnkhtdrah, and Abu Nu‘aym in Akhhdr Ishahdn. 

170. Al-Dariml and Ahmad with a sahib isnad. 

171. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahib and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

172. Al-Mundhirl said, “ Taghannd does mean to recite in a pleasant voice.” 
Sufyan bin Uyaynah and others took the the view that it is to do 
with istighnd (i.e. letting the Quran make one dispense with worldly 
pleasures), but this is rejected. 

173. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, al-TahawI, and Ibn Mandah in Tawhid (81/1). 



Recitation 


79 


174. The scholars have said that musical instruments here means a beauti¬ 
ful voice and that the family of Dawud refers to Dawud himself; the 
family of so-and-so can be specifically for so-and-so only; Dawud had 
an extremely beautiful voice. This is mentioned by al-NawawI in his 
commentary on Sahih Muslim. 

175. ‘Abd al-Razzaq in al-Amdli (2/44/1), al-Bukharl, Muslim, Ibn Nasr, 
and al-Hakim. 

176. Abu Dawud, Ibn Hibban, al-Tabaranl, Ibn ‘Asakir (2/296/2) and al- 
Diya in al-Mukhtdrah with a sahih isnad. 

177. Arabic al-Tafl\ to blow with a minimum amount of saliva. ( Nihdyah ) 

178. Muslim and Ahmad. Al-NawawI says, “This hadith contains a recom¬ 
mendation to seek refuge from the devil when he tempts, along with 
spitting to the left three times.” 



Chapter Six 


The Ruku ‘ 


Contents 

6.1 The ruku ‘ described 81 

6.2 The obligation of being at ease in ruku ‘ 81 

6.3 The adhkar in ruku 82 

6.4 Lengthening the ruku ' 84 

6.5 Forbiddance of reciting the Quran in ruku 84 

6.6 Rising from ruku ' and what is to be said then 84 

6.7 Lengthening this standing and the obligation to be 
at ease in it 88 

Endnotes 89 

After completing his recitation, he would pause for a moment, 1 then 
raise his hands 2 in the way described earlier under the Opening Takbir, say 
takbir , 3 and make rukii‘. A 

He also ordered the one who prayed badly likewise, saying to him, “Indeed, 
the prayer of one of you is not complete until he makes an excellent ablution 
as Allah has commanded him to... then he celebrates Allah’s greatness, praises 
and glorifies Him, then recites the Quran as much as is easy for him from 
what Allah has taught him and allowed him, then says takbir and makes 


80 




The Ruku ‘ 


ruku [and places his hands on his knees] until his joints are at ease and 
relaxed.” 5 

6.1 The ruku ‘ described 

He 0 * would place his palms on his knees, 6 and would order them to do like¬ 
wise, 7 as he ordered the one who prayed badly in the aforementioned hadlth. 

He i§ would put his hands firmly on his knees [as though he were grasp¬ 
ing them], 8 and would space his fingers out, 9 ordering the one who prayed 
badly likewise, saying: “When you make ruku, place your palms on your 
knees, then space your fingers out, then remain (like that) until every limb 
takes its (proper) place.” 10 

He | used to spread himself (i.e. not be in a compact position), and keep 
his elbows away from his sides. 11 

When he |§| made rukii, he would spread his back and make it level, 12 
such that if water were poured on it, it (the water) would stay there (i.e. not 
run off). 13 He also said to the one who prayed badly, “When you make 
rukii \ put your palms on your knees, spread your back (flat) and hold firm 
in your ruku‘.” 14 

He [ would neither let his head droop nor raise it (i.e. higher than his 
back), 15 but it would be in between. 16 

6.2 The obligation of being at ease in rukii ‘ 

He §§| used to be at ease in his ruku', and ordered the one who prayed badly 
to be so, as has been mentioned in the first section on ruku \ 

He | used to say, “Complete the ruku ‘ and sujud, for by Him in whose 
Hand is my soul, I surely see you behind my back 17 when you make ruku 


The Ruku ‘ 


82 


and sujiid ” 18 

He j§ saw a man praying not completing his rukii ‘ properly, and pecking 
in his sujiid, so he said, “Were this man to die in this state, he would die on a 
faith other than that of Muhammad, [pecking in his prayer as a crow pecks 
at blood; he who does not make rukii ‘ completely and pecks in his sujiid is 
like the hungry person who eats one or two dates, which are of no use to 
him at all .]” 19 

Abu Hurayrah said, “My close friend ij§ forbade me from pecking in 
my prayer like a cockerel, from looking around like a fox, and from squatting 
like a monkey .” 20 

The Messenger of Allah |§j also used to say, “The worst thief among men is 
the one who steals from his prayer.” They said, “O Messenger of Allah, how 
does he steal from his prayer?” He said, “He does not complete its rukii and 
sujiid ” 21 

Once, he i§§ was praying, when he glanced out of the corner of his eye at 
a man not settling his backbone in ruku ‘ and sujiid. Upon finishing, he ■; 
said, “O Assembly of Muslims! Verily, the prayer is not valid of the one who 
does not settle his spine in ruku and sujiid ” 22 

He said in another hadith, “The prayer of a man does not count unless he 
straightens his back in rukii‘ and sujiid” 2i 

6.3 The adhkar in rukii‘ 

He would say different types of remembrance of Allah and supplication, any 
one of the following at a time: 


I. 



The Ruku ‘ 


83 


“How Perfect is my Lord, the Supreme!,” three times . 24 But some¬ 
times, he would repeat it more than that . 25 Once, in night prayer, 
he repeated it so much that his ruku became nearly as long as his 
standing before it, in which he had recited three of the Long Surahs: 
al-Baqarak, al-Nisd, and Al Imran. This prayer was full of supplication 
and seeking forgiveness, and the hadith has already been mentioned 
under Recitation in Tahajjud Prayer. 


2. 


o ■ , j e • h * 11 1 1 _ . __ ,1 


“How Perfect is my Lord, the Supreme, and Praised be He,” three 
times . 26 


3 - 




“Perfect, Blessed , 27 Lord of the Angels and the Spirit .” 28 


4 - 




“How Perfect You are O Allah, and Praises are for You. O Allah, forgive 
me.” He would say it often in his ruku and sujiid, implementing (the 
order of) the Quran . 29 


^ t ^ o . ,1 cjAl ^ . ..*>- Cto 1 ] £11 ■1 t ^ cjAl - ^ ■ 1 \ 

A3] t '•'Qjj .33) 3 w j; tjh^J 

.[ijcJUJl 4 ju 


“O Allah! To You I have bowed; in You I have believed; to You I have 
submitted; [You are my Lord]; humbled for You are my hearing, my 
seeing, my marrow, my bone (in one narration: my bones), my sinews, 
[and whatever my feet carry 30 (are humbled) for Allah, Lord of the 
Worlds ].” 31 


The Rukii ' 


84 


^ . . . *>- j^c;—fyto „ 1 . ,. 1 ^c*~—., a 1 cjAl ^^_U 1 

-iji-^A*Jl 4-U ^g > ./sc -j )j c -^ l£,^j lS j^ij ^'*~'' 


“O Allah! To You I have bowed; in You I have believed; to You I have 
submitted; in You I have placed my trust; You are my Lord; my hear¬ 
ing, my seeing, my blood, my flesh, my bones, and my sinews are 
humbled for Allah, Lord of the Worlds .” 32 


. A „ )A *J L fcfy^SsJlj O^Ss-LJIj 


“How Perfect is He Who has all Power, Kingdom, Magnificence, and 
Supremacy,” which he used to say in night prayer. 


6.4 Lengthening the ruku ‘ 

He §§§ used to make his ruku, his standing after rukii', his sujiid, and his 
sitting in between the two sajdabs, nearly equal in length . 33 


6.5 Forbiddance of reciting the Quran in ruku ‘ 

He used to forbid recitation of the Quran in rukii' and sujiid. iA Further, he 
used to say, “Verily, I have indeed been forbidden from reciting the Quran 
in rukii ' or sujiid. In the ruku ', therefore, glorify the Supremacy of the Lord, 
Almighty and Sublime, in it; as for the sujiid, exert yourselves in supplication 
in it, for it is most likely that you will be answered .” 35 


6.6 Rising from ruku ‘ and what is to be said then 


Next, he H§ would straighten up his back out of rukii', saying, 

.Si r t>J iill 


The Rukii ‘ 


85 


“Allah listens to the one who praises Him .” 36 

He IjfJ also ordered the one who prayed badly to do that, when he said to 
him: “No person’s prayer is complete until.. .he has said takblr .. .then made 
ruku ... then has said Allah listens to the one who praises Him until he is 
standing straight .” 37 When he raised his head, he would stand straight until 
every vertebra returned to its place . 38 

Next, he Hi would say while standing, 

.llil dJj [j] 

“Our Lord, [and] to You be all Praise .” 39 

He i has commanded all worshipers, whether behind an Imam or not, 
to do the above on rising from ruku ,, by saying “Pray as you have seen me 

• ”40 

praying. 

He | also used to say, “The Imam is there to be followed.. .when he has 
said Allah listens to the one who praises Him’ then say, ‘ [O Allah!] Our Lord, 
and to You be all Praise;’ Allah will listen to you, for indeed, Allah, Blessed 
and Exalted, has said via the tongue of His Prophet i§§: Allah listens to the 
one who praises Him.’ ” 41 

He : also gave a reason for this command in another hadith, saying: 
“...for he whose saying coincides with that of the angels will have his past 
sins forgiven .” 42 

He i§ used to raise his hands when straightening up , 43 in the ways de¬ 
scribed under the Opening Takbir. 

While standing, he ij§ would say, as previously mentioned, 

j .114-1 dbj 


“Our Lord, and to You be all Praise ;” 44 or 


2. 


Our Lord, to You be all Praise .” 45 


.llil dU 


The Ruku ‘ 


86 


Sometimes, he i§| would add at the beginning of either of these: 

3 . -fii» 

“O Allah !...” 46 

He !§J used to order others to do this, saying, “"When the Imam says: 
‘Allah listens to the one who praises Him,’ then say: ‘O Allah! Our 
Lord, to You be all Praise,’ for he whose saying coincides with that of 
the angels will have his past sins forgiven .” 47 


Sometimes, he |§| would add either: 


4 - 


• JJCJ A^^ C-JLa La A^j-A^ jLa-LJ \ A^J-A... 


“... Filling the heavens, filling the earth, and filling whatever else You 
wish ,” 48 or 


-JjCJ CtCLa La A^J-AJ l 1 Laj t ( jAPj3ll I A^-a... 


“...Filling the heavens, [filling] the earth, whatever is between them, 
and filling whatever else You wish .” 49 


Sometimes, he > . would add even further: 


6 . 


IS ill: «cJoi U1 Nj UJ N o^dlj aIISJI jid 


• lid ilia ji-l 

“Lord of Glory and Majesty! None can withhold what You grant, and 
none can grant what You withhold; nor can the possessions of an 
owner benefit him in front of You .” 50 


Or, sometimes, the addition would be: 



The Ruku ‘ 


87 


7. iCs* 1 ( y? c-J iJo L* LQaJ l<,4:ik 1 LajaJ_aj toL^LLLJ] a^J^o 

tLL.K&l UJ ^LL 'i [^$1)1] t-u-c- DJ LLKj t j 2H jli Laj^>.11j^LHj jllSJl 
.-Q-l LL-a -Q-l li £-a-o Vj [>CUj<_La LLJ ^jiutA 'Llj] 

“Filling the heavens, filling the earth, and filling whatever else You 
wish. Lord of Glory and Majesty!—The truest thing a slave has said, 
and we are all slaves to You. [O Allah!] None can withhold what You 
grant, [and none can grant what You withhold,] nor can the posses¬ 
sions of an owner benefit him in front of You .” 51 


Sometimes, he |§| would say the following during night prayer: 

8 


“To my Lord be all Praise, to my Lord be all Praise,” repeating it until 
his standing was about as long as his rukii which had been nearly as 
long as his first standing, in which he had recited al-Baqarah (Quran, 
2). 52 


9 - 


12 >j VS 21c- VjLLi] 452 Lit ' \j\ jS" LJ?~ jLJ-1 lIUj 2>J 


“Our Lord, and to You be all Praise, so much pure praise, inherently 
blessed, [externally blessed, as our Lord loves and is pleased with ].” 53 


A man praying behind him |fj said this after he |§| had raised his 
head from rukii ‘ and said: “Allah listens to the one who praises Pfim.” 
When the Messenger of Allah had finished his prayer, he said, “Who 
was the one speaking just now?” The man said, “It was I, O Messenger 
of Allah.” So the Messenger of Allah |§s said, “I saw over thirty angels 
hurrying to be the first one to write it down .” 54 


The Ruku ‘ 


88 


6.7 Lengthening this standing and the obligation to be at 
ease in it 

He i§§ used to make this standing about as long as his ruku, as has been 
mentioned; in fact, he would stand (for so long) sometimes that one would 
say, “He has forgotten,” [because of his standing for so long .] 55 

He used to instruct them to be at ease in it; hence, he said to the one 
who prayed badly, “...next, raise your head until you are standing straight 
[and every bone has taken its proper place]”—in another narration, “When 
you rise, make your spine upright and raise your head, until the bones return 
to their joints .” 56 

He 7 also reminded him that no one’s prayer is complete unless he does 
that, and used to say: “Allah, Mighty and Sublime, does not look at the 
prayer of the slave who does not make his backbone upright in between his 
bowings and prostrations .” 57 


Endnotes 

1. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahib and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

2. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. This raising of the hands is reported as mu- 
tawdtir from him §§J, as is the raising of the hands on straightening 
up after mku '. It is the madhhah of the three Imams, Malik, al-Shafi‘I, 
and Ahmad, and of the majority of scholars of hadith and fiqh. Imam 
Malik practiced it right up to his death, as reported by Ibn ‘Asakir 
(15/78/2). Some of the Hanafls chose to do it, among them ‘Isam 
bin Yusuf Abu ‘Asamah al-Balkhi (d. ah 210), a student of Imam 
Abu Yusuf, as has been explained in the Introduction. ‘Abd Allah bin 
Ahmad reported from his father in his Masd’il (p. 60), “It is related 
from ‘Uqbah bin ‘Amir that he said about a man raising his hands 
during prayer, ‘He earns ten good deeds for each such movement.’ ” 
This is supported by the hadith qudsi , “.. .he who intends a good deed 
and then does it, Allah writes it down with Himself as from ten to 
seven hundred good deeds,” transmitted by al-Bukharl and Muslim. 
See Sahib al-Targhib (#16). 

3. Ibid. 

4. Ibid. 


89 


The Ruku ‘ 


90 


5. Abu Dawud and al-Nasa I. Al-Hakim declared it sahih and al-Dhahabi 
concurred. 

6. Al-Bukhari and Abu Dawud. 

7. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

8. Al-Bukhari and Abu Dawud. 

9. Al-Hakim and he declared it sahih-, Al-Dhahabi and al-Tayalisi agreed. 
It is given in Sahih Abi Dawud (#809). 

o. Ibn Khuzaymah and Ibn Hibban in their Sahibs. 

1. Ibn Khuzaymah and Al-TirmidhI who declared it sahih. 

2. Al-Bukhari, and al-Bayhaql with a sahih isnad. 

3. Al-TabaranI in Mu‘jam al-Kabir and Mu'jam al-Saghir , Ibn Majah, 
and ‘Abd Allah bin Ahmad in Zawaid al-Musnad. 

4. Ahmad and Abu Dawud with a sahih isnad. 

5. Abu Dawud and al-Bukharl in Juz al-Qird’ah with a sahih isnad. 

6 . Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

7. This vision was physically real, and was one of his miracles; it was 
confined to during prayer: there is no evidence for it being of a general 
nature. 


Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 



The Ruku ‘ 


9 i 


19. Abu Ya‘la in his Musnad (340/3491/1), al-Ajurrl in al-Arbaln, al- 
Bayhaql, al-Tabarani (1/192/1), al-Diya in al-Muntaqd (276/1), Ibn 
‘Asakir (2/226/2, 414/1, 8/14/1, 76/2) with a hasan isnad, and Ibn 
Khuzaymah declared it sahib (1/82/1). Ibn Battah has a supporting 
mursal narration for the first part of the hadith, minus the addition, 
in al-Ibdnah (5/43/1). 

20. Al-Tayalisi, Ahmad, and Ibn Abi Shaybah; it is a hasan hadith, as I 
have explained in my footnotes on al-Ahkdm (1348) by Abd al-Haqq 
al-Ishblll. 

21. Ibn Abi Shaybah (1/89/2), al-Tabarani, and al-Hakim who declared 
it sahib and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

22. Ibn Abi Shaybah (1/89/1), Ibn Majah, and Ahmad with a sahib isnad. 

23. Abu Awanah, Abu Dawud, and al-Sahml (61); Al-Daraqutnl declared 
it sahib. 

24. Ahmad, Abu Dawud, Ibn Majah, al-Daraqutnl, al-Tahawi, al-Bazzar, 
and al-Tabarani in Mu jam al-Kabir, on the authority of seven Com¬ 
panions. Hence this refutes those who did not accept the specification 
of the glorifications to three times, such as Ibn al-Qayyim and others. 

25. This can be deduced from the ahadith which make it clear that he 
if| used to make his standing, rukii \ and sujud equal in length, as 
mentioned after this section. 

26. A sahib hadith, transmitted by Abu Dawud, al-Daraqutnl, Ahmad, 
al-Tabarani, and al-Bayhaql. 


The Ruku ‘ 


92 


27. Abu Ishaq said: subbiib means “the one who is free of any defect,” 
while quddiis means “the Blessed” or “the Pure.” Ibn Sayyidah said: 
“Glorified and Blessed are attributes of Allah, Almighty and Sublime, 
because He is glorified and sanctified by others.” ( Lisdn al-Arab ) 

28. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

29. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. “Implementing the Quran” refers to the say¬ 
ing of Allah: «Then glorify with the Praises of your Lord, and seek His 
Forgiveness, for He is Oft-Returning.» (Quran, 110:3) 

30. This is an example of use of a general phrase coming after mention of 
individual items. 

31. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, al-Tahawi, and al-Daraqutnl. 

3 2. Al-Nasa I with a sahib isndd. 

Note: Is there proof for combining two or more of these adbkdr in 
one ruku ? The scholars have differed about this. Ibn al-Qayyim was 
uncertain about this in Zad al-Madd. Al-Nawawl chose the first pos¬ 
sibility in al-Adbkar, saying, “It is best to combine all of these adbkdr 
if possible, and similarly with the adbkdr of other postures.” Abu al- 
Tayyib Siddlq Hasan Khan disagreed with him, saying in Nuzid al- 
Abrdr (84), “It is narrated with one of them here, another one there, 
but I see no evidence for combining. The Messenger of Allah ifj would 
not combine them in one go, but he would say one of them some¬ 
times, another one sometimes; to follow is better than to start some¬ 
thing new.” This latter view is the correct one, in-sbd-Alldb , but it is 
proved in the Sunnah to lengthen this posture, as well as others, until 
it is about the length of the standing: hence, if the worshiper wishes 


The Rukii ‘ 


93 


to follow the Prophet -A in this sunnab, the only way is to combine 
adhkar, as Al-Nawawl said, and as Ibn Nasr has related it in Qiydm 
al-Layl (76) from Ibn Jurayj as done by ‘Ata, or to repeat one of the 
adhkar for which there is text for repetition, and this is closer to the 
Sunnah. Allah knows best. 

33. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#3 31). 

3 4. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. The forbiddance is general, hence covering 
both obligatory and voluntary prayers. The addition in Ibn ‘Asakir 
(17/299/1), “as for voluntary prayers, then there is no harm” is either 
shadh or munkar —Ibn ‘Asakir pointed out a defect in it— so it is not 
permissible to act according to it. 

35. Ibid. 

36. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

3 7. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

38. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud; Arabic faqdr. vertebrae, “the bones mak¬ 
ing up the spine, from the base of the neck to the coccyx” according 
to Qdmus. See also Fath al-Bdri (2/308). 

39. Al-Bukharl and Ahmad. 

40. Ibid. 

41. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, Ahmad, and Abu Dawud. 


The Rukii' 


94 


Note: This hadlth doesn’t prove that those following an Imam should 
not share with the Imam in saying: “Allah listens to the one who 
praises Him,” just as it does not prove that the Imam does not share 
with those following him in saying: “Our Lord, to You be all Praise.” 
This is because the purpose of this hadlth is not to set out exactly 
what the Imam and his followers should say in this position; rather, it 
explains that the followers’ tahmld should be said after the Imam’s tas- 
mi. This is supported by the fact that the Prophet ' used to say the 
tahmld when he was the Imam, and also because the generality of his 
saying, “Pray as you have seen me praying,” dictates that the follower 
should say what the Imam says, e.g. tasmi , etc. Those respected broth¬ 
ers who referred to us in this issue should consider this, and perhaps 
what we have mentioned is satisfactory. Whoever would like further 
discussion on this issue should refer to the article by al-Hafiz al-Suyutl 
on this matter in his book al-Hawl ll al-Fatawl (1/529). 

42. Al-Bukharl and Muslim; al-Tirmidhl declared it sahlh. 

43. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. The raising of the hands here is narrated in 
a mutawdtir way from the Messenger j§, and the majority of scholars 
have supported it, including some Hanafls. See previous footnotes 
under Rukii'. 

44. Ibid. 

45. Ibid. 

46. Al-Bukharl and AJtmad. Ibn al-Qayyim erred on this point in Zad 
al-Ma ‘ad, rejecting the combination of “O Allah!” with “and,” de¬ 
spite the fact that it is found in Sahlh al-Bukhari, Musnad Ahmad, 


The Ruku ‘ 


95 


in al-Nasa I, and Ahmad again via two routes of narration from Abu 
Hurayrah, in al-Dariml as a hadith of Ibn ‘Umar islfg, in al-Bayhaql 
from Abu Sa‘ld al-Khudrl i%, and in al-Nasa’I again as a hadith of 
Abu Musa al-Ash‘arI i%,. 

47. Al-Bukharl and Muslim; al-Tirmidhl declared it sahih. 

48. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

49. Ibid. 

50. Arabic jadd\ wealth, might, power; i.e. the one who has wealth, sons, 
might, and power in this world will not benefit from them in front of 
You; his possessions will not save him from You: only righteous deeds 
will benefit or save anyone. 

51. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

5 2. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and Abu Dawud. 

53. Abu Dawud and al-Nasa’I with a sahih isndd. It is given in Irwd al- 
Ghalil (#335). 

54. Malik, al-Bukharl, and Abu Dawud. 

55. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and Ahmad. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#307). 

5 6. Al-Bukharl and Muslim (first sentence only), al-Dariml, al-Hakim, al- 
Shafi‘1, and Ahmad. “Bones” here refer to those of the spinal structure, 
the vertebrae, as has preceded in the main text. 



The Rukii ‘ 


96 


Note: The meaning of this hadith is clear and obvious: to be at ease 
in this standing. As for the usage of this hadith by our brothers from 
the Hijaz and elsewhere as evidence to justify placing the right hand 
on the left in this standing, it is far-removed from the meaning of the 
multitude of narrations of this hadith. In fact it is a false argument, 
since the placing mentioned is not referred to with regard to the first 
standing in any of the narrations or wordings of the hadith, there¬ 
fore, how can “the bones taking their proper places” mentioned in 
the hadith be interpreted as referring to the right hand taking hold of 
the left before mku '?! This would apply if all the versions of the hadith 
could be construed to mean this, so what about when they imply an 
obviously different meaning? In fact, this placing of theirs cannot be 
inferred from the hadith at all, since what is meant by “bones” is the 
bones of the spine, as confirmed by the Sunnah, “...he would stand 
straight until every vertebra returned to its place.” 

I, for one, am in no doubt that to place the hands on the chest in this 
standing is an innovation and a leading astray, for it is not mentioned 
in any of the ahadith about prayer, despite their large number. Had 
this practice any foundation, it would have reached us by at least one 
narration. Further, not one of the Salaf practiced it, nor has a single 
leading scholar of hadith mentioned it, as far as I know. 

This is not inconsistent with what Shaykh al-Tuwayjiri has quoted in 
his article (pp. 18—19) from Imam Ahmad, “If one wishes, he may 
leave his hands by his sides, or, if he wishes, he can place them on 
his chest,” for Imam Ahmad did not attribute this to the Prophet 
but said it from his own ijtihad and opinion, and opinion can be er¬ 
roneous. When authentic evidence establishes the innovatory nature 
of any practice, such as this one, then the saying of an Imam in its 


The Ruku ‘ 


97 


favor does not negate its being an innovation, as Shaykh al-Islam Ibn 
Taymlyyah has written. In fact, I see in these words of his, an indica¬ 
tion that Imam Ahmad did not regard the above-mentioned placing 
as being proved in the Sunnah, for he allowed a choice between prac¬ 
ticing it and leaving it!—Does the respected Shaykh think that the 
Imam also allowed a similar choice regarding placing the hands be¬ 
fore ruku'i Thus, it is proved that the placing of the hands on the 
chest in the standing after ruku ‘ is not part of the Sunnah. This is a 
brief discussion of this issue, which could be dealt with in more detail 
and depth, but due to lack of space here, that is done instead in my 
Refutation against Shaykh al-Tuwayjiri. 

57. Ahmad and al-Tabaranl in Mu'jam al-Kabir with a sahih isnad. 



Chapter Seven 


The Sujud 


Contents 

7. i Going down into sajdab on the hands 99 

7.2 The sajdab described 99 

7.3 The obligation to be at ease in sujud 101 

7.4 The adhkar of sujud 101 

7.5 Forbiddance of reciting the Quran in sujitd 104 

7 .6 Lengthening the sajdab 104 

7.7 Excellence of sajdab 105 

7.8 Sajdab on the ground and on mats 106 

7.9 Rising from sajdab 107 

7.10 To sit muftarishan between the two sajdahs 107 

7.11 Iq ‘a between the two sajdahs 107 

7.12 The obligation of being at ease between the two saj¬ 
dahs 107 

7.13 Lengthening the sitting between the two sajdahs 108 

7.14 The adhkar between the two sajdahs 108 

7.15 The second sajdab 108 

7.16 The sitting of rest 109 


98 



The Snjiid 


99 


7.17 Supporting oneself with the hands on rising for the 
next rak‘ah 109 
Endnotes no 

Next, he would say takblr and go down into sajdah, 1 and he ordered 
the one who prayed badly to do so, saying to him, “No one’s prayer is complete 
unless...he says: ‘Allah listens to the one who praises Him,’ and stands up 
straight, then says: ‘Allah is the Greatest,’ and prostrates such that his joints 
are at rest.” 2 

Also, when he |§| wanted to perform sajdah, he would say takblr, [separate 
his hands from his sides], and then perform sajdah . 3 Sometimes, he ij§ would 
raise his hands when performing sajdah. 4 

7.1 Going down into sajdah on the hands 

He |§3 used to place his hands on the ground before his knees. 5 He used 
to instruct likewise, saying, “When one of you performs sajdah, he should 
not kneel like a camel, but should place his hands before his knees.” 6 

He also used to say, “Verily, the hands prostrate as the face prostrates, so 
when one of you places his face (on the ground), he should place his hands, 
and when he raises it, he should raise them.” 7 


7.2 The sajdah described 

He H§ would support himself on his palms [and spread them], 8 put his fin¬ 
gers together, 9 and point them towards the qiblah . 10 

Also, he . would put them (his palms) level with his shoulders, 11 and 
sometimes level with his ears. 12 He ij§ would put his nose and forehead 
firmly on the ground. 13 



The Sujud 


ioo 


He HI said to the one who prayed badly, “When you prostrate, then be firm 
in your prostration;” 14 in one narration: “When you prostrate, put your face 
and hands down firmly, until all of your bones are relaxed in their proper 
places.” 15 

He : also used to say, “There is no prayer for the one whose nose does 
not feel as much of the ground as the forehead.” 16 

He §3 used to put his knees and toes down firmly, 17 point with the front of 
the toes towards the qiblah, 1& put his heels together, 19 keep his feet upright, 20 
and ordered likewise. 21 

Hence, these are the seven limbs on which he |§| would prostrate: the 
(two) palms, the (two) knees, the (two) feet, and the forehead and nose— 
counting the last two as one limb in prostration, as he §§:* said: “I have been 
ordered to prostrate (in one narration: we have been ordered to prostrate) 
on seven bones: on the forehead...” and he indicated by moving his hand 22 
around his nose, “...the hands (in one version: the palms), the knees and 
the toes, and not to tuck up 23 the garments and hair.” 24 

He ; also used to say, “When a slave prostrates, seven limbs prostrate 
with him: his face, his palms, his knees, and his feet.” 25 He j§ said about 
a man who was praying with his hair tied 26 behind him, “His example is 
surely like that of someone who prays with his hands bound (behind his 
back).” 27 He also said, “That is the saddle of the devil,” i.e. where the devil 
sits, referring to the knots in the hair. 28 

He •; would not rest his forearms on the ground, 29 but would raise them 
above the ground, and keep them away from his sides such that the whiteness 
of his armpits could be seen from behind, 30 and also such that if a small lamb 
or kid wanted to pass under his arms, it would have been able to do so. 31 

He Jfe would do this to such an extent that one of his Companions 
said, “We used to feel sorry for the Messenger of Allah §§s because of the way 


The Sujfid 


IOI 


he kept his hands away from his sides.” 32 

He IjfJ used to order likewise, saying, “When you perform sajdah, place 
your palms (on the ground) and raise your elbows,” 33 and “Be level in sujfid, 
and none of you should spread his forearms like the spreading of a dog (in 
one narration: like a dog spreads them).” 34 In a separate hadlth, “None of 
you should rest arms on the ground the way a dog rests them.” 35 

He > also used to say, “Do not spread your arms [the way a beast of prey 
does], rest on your palms and keep your upper arms apart, for when you do 
all that, every one of your limbs prostrates with you.” 36 

7.3 The obligation to be at ease in sujud 

He used to command the completion of ruku and sujfid, comparing 
someone not doing so to the hungry man who eats one or two dates, which 
are of no use to him, and also saying about him, “he is indeed one of the 
worst thieves among the people.” 

He also ruled that the prayer of one who does not straighten his spine 
fully in ruku ‘ and sujud is invalid, as has been mentioned under Ruku ' and 
ordered the one who prayed badly to be at ease in his sujfid, as mentioned 
before. 

7.4 The adhkar of sujud 

He ; would say any one of the following remembrances of Allah and sup¬ 
plications in this posture. 

1. C0^**" 

“How Perfect is my Lord, the Most High,” three times . 37 Sometimes, 
he would repeat it more times than that. 38 Once, he repeated it so 


The Sujfid 


102 


much that his sujfid were nearly as long as his standing, in which 
he had recited three of the Long Surahs: al-Baqarah, al-Nisd, and Al 
‘Imran. That prayer was full of supplication and seeking of forgiveness, 
as mentioned before under Recitation in Tahajjud Prayer. 


“How Perfect is my Lord, the Most High, and Praised be He,” three 
times . 39 


3 - 


lu, - - S' H * i > 


“Perfect, Blessed, Lord of the Angels and the Spirit .” 40 


“How perfect You are O Allah, our Lord, and Praised. O Allah! Forgive 
me,” which he would say often in his rukii‘ and sujfid, implementing 
the order of the Quran . 41 


-ail dljUji[_s] to ju.T jl „jyZjj [tojj^o to^*2^ 4j i\s>- 


“O Allah! For you I have prostrated; in You I have believed; to You I 
have submitted; [You are my Lord;] my face has prostrated for the One 
Who created it and shaped it, [shaped it excellently,] then brought 
forth its hearing and vision: [so] blessed be Allah, the Best to Cre¬ 
ate !” 42 




“O Allah! Forgive me all my sins: the minor and the major, the first 
and the last, the open and the hidden .” 43 


6 . 


The Sujud 


103 


Jo 0 jjb (jij J- 4 ^ -^TT 


“My person and my shadow have prostrated to You; my heart has be¬ 
lieved in You; I acknowledge Your favors towards me: here are my 
hands and whatever I have earned against myself.” 44 [It later became 
clear to Shaykh al-Albanl that this narration is actually weak. See Sil- 
silah al-Ahiidith al-Da‘ifab (#2145, #6579).] 


.a„ IS*J \j o^SsdJl^ *1 


“How Perfect is He Who has all Power, Kingdom, Magnificence, and 
Supremacy,” 45 which he would say in night prayer, as with the follow¬ 
ing ones: 

.cit Si) all V..dUUJJ 


“How perfect You are [O Allah] and Praised. None has the right to be 
worshiped except you.” 46 


10. 


.cJlL&I U) —jjjb® ~ 11b 


“O Allah! Forgive me what (sins) I have concealed and what (sins) I 
have done openly.” 47 


11 . Ji ‘Llp j J*4"!3 [‘Llp j}] ‘LlP c| 

‘L>_P br^5 (3j* ‘LlP ‘LlP 

j JiJ'j] djji djji ‘bjj 

■Ijji ci (4^13 


“O Allah! Place light in my heart; [and light in my tongue;] and place 
light in my hearing; and place light in my seeing; and place light from 
below me; and place light from above me, and light on my right, and 


The Snjiid 


104 


light on my left; and place light ahead of me; and place light behind 
me; [and place light in my self;] and make the light greater for me.” 48 


C^ojl \jS C-ol elhshc. s-llS ^^>-1 jl liLl« ijtlj 


“ [O Allah!] [Indeed] I seek refuge with Your Pleasure from Your Anger; 
[I seek refuge] with Your Pardons from Your Punishment; I seek refuge 
with You from You. I cannot count all exaltations upon You; You are 
as You have extolled Yourself.” 49 


7.5 Forbiddance of reciting the Quran in sujud 

He used to forbid recitation of the Quran in ruku and sujiid, and com¬ 
manded striving in, and a lot of, supplication in this posture, as explained 
previously under Rukfi '. He J also used to say, “The slave is closest to his 
Lord when he is prostrating, so increase supplication [in it].” 50 

7.6 Lengthening the sajdah 

He would make his sujud about as long as his ruku, and sometimes 
he would make it extremely long due to the circumstances, as one of his 
Companions said: 

The Messenger of Allah came out to us for one of the two 
later prayers, [Zuhr or Asr,] carrying al-Hasan or al-Husayn. 

The Prophet §§ then came to the front and put him down [next 
to his right foot], said takbir for the prayer and commenced 
praying. During the prayer, he performed a very long prostra¬ 
tion, so I raised my head [from among the people], and there 


The Sujud 


105 


was the child, on the back of the Messenger of Allah 5 , who 
was in prostration. I then returned to my prostration. When 
the Messenger of Allah |§J had offered the prayer, the people 
said, “O Messenger of Allah! In the middle of [this] your prayer, 
you performed a prostration and lengthened it so much that we 
thought either something had happened, or that you were re¬ 
ceiving revelation!” He |§| said, “Neither of these was the case: 
actually, my son made me his mount, so I did not want to hurry 
him until he had satisfied his wish.” 51 

In another hadlth, “He ... was praying. When he performed sajdah, al- 
Hasan and al-Husayn jumped onto his back. When the people tried to stop 
them, he gestured to them to leave the two alone. After offering his prayer, 
he placed them in his lap and said, ‘Whoever loves me should love these 
two.’ ” 52 

7.7 Excellence of sajdah 

He used to say, “There is no one among my Ummah whom I will not 
recognize on the Day of Resurrection.” They said, “How will you recognize 
them, O Messenger of Allah, among the multitude of created beings?” He 
said, “Do you not see that were one of you to enter an enclosure in which 
there was a jet black 53 steed and a horse with a white forehead and legs, 54 
would you not recognize the latter from the former?” They said, “Of course.” 
He said, “Thus, my Ummah on that day will surely have white faces 55 because 
of sujud, and white arms and feet 56 because of ablution.” 57 

He would also say, “When Allah intends to have mercy on whomsoever he 
wishes of the people of the Fire, He will order the angels to bring out whoever 
used to worship Allah; so they will bring them out, recognizing them from 


The Snjiid 


io 6 


the marks of sujild, for Allah has prohibited the Fire from devouring the 
marks of sujud. Thus, they will be brought out from the Fire, for the Fire 
devours all of a son of Adam except the marks of sujud” 5S 

7.8 Sajdah on the ground and on mats 59 

Fie i§ would often prostrate on the (bare) ground. 60 

His Companions Jl§fe would pray with him in the intense heat, so 
when one of them could not press his forehead against the ground, he would 
spread his robe and prostrate on that. 61 

He : also used to say, “The whole earth has been made a masjid (place 
of worship) and a purification for me and my Ummah\ so wherever prayer 
becomes due on someone of my Ummab, he has his masjid (place of worship) 
and his purification next to him. Those before me used to think that this was 
too much: indeed, they would only pray in their churches and synagogues ” 62 
Sometimes, he S§5 would prostrate in mud and water, and that happened 
to him once at dawn on the twenty-first night of Ramadan, when it rained 
and the roof of the mosque, which was made of palm-branches, was washed 
away. So he ) prostrated in mud and water; Abu Sa‘ld al-Khudrl d§k, said, 
“So I saw, with my own eyes, the Messenger of Allah f§, with traces of mud 
and water on his forehead and nose.” 63 

Also, he would pray on a khnmrah M sometimes, or on a mat 65 some¬ 
times, and he prayed on it once when it had become blackened due to pro¬ 
longed use. 66 


The Sujud 


107 


7.9 Rising from sajdah 

Next, he ij§ would raise his head from prostration while saying takbir , 67 and 
he ordered the one who prayed badly to do that, saying, “The prayer of any 
person is not complete until...he prostrates until his limbs are at rest, then 
he says, ‘Allah is the Greatest and raises his head until he is sitting straight .” 68 
Also, he |§§ would raise his hands with this takbir sometimes . 69 

7.10 To sit muftarishan between the two sajdahs 

Next, he |§| would lay his left foot along the ground and sit on it [relaxed] , 70 
and he |§J ordered the one who prayed badly thus, saying to him, “When you 
prostrate, prostrate firmly, then when you rise, sit on your left thigh .” 71 

He If! would have his right foot upright , 72 and point its toes towards the 
qiblah. 7i 

7.11 Iq ‘a between the two sajdahs 

He |j§ would sometimes practice iq‘d [resting on both his heels and (all) his 
toes] , 74 

7.12 The obligation of being at ease between the two saj¬ 
dahs 

He ij§ would be relaxed until every bone returned to its (proper) position , 75 
and he ordered the one who prayed badly likewise, and said to him, “The 
prayer of any of you is not complete until he does this .” 76 


The Snjiid 


108 


7.13 Lengthening the sitting between the two sajdahs 

Also, he i§ would lengthen it until it was about almost as long as his sajdah , 77 
and sometimes, he ; would remain (in this position) until one would say: 
“He has forgotten .” 78 


7.14 The adhkar between the two sajdahs 

In this sitting, he i§ would say: 

1. [‘ l _j('-Jjj : )j tjj) 7$-^ 

“O Allah! (in one version: O my Lord!) Forgive me; have mercy on 
me; [strengthen me;] [raise my rank;] guide me; [pardon me;] sustain 
me .” 79 Or sometimes, he would say: 

2. ■ 4 -^' VJ 

“O my Lord! Forgive me, forgive me .” 80 

He would say the above two in night prayer also . 81 


7.15 The second sajdah 

Next, he would say takbir and prostrate for the second time . 82 He also 
ordered the one who prayed badly to do so, saying to him after he had ordered 
him to be at ease between sajdahs, “...then say Allah is the Greatest’ and 
prostrate until your joints are relaxed [and do that in all your prayer ].” 83 He 
would perform this sajdah exactly as he performed the first one. Also, he 
would raise his hands with this takbir sometimes . 84 


The Sujfid 


109 


Next, he would raise his head while saying takblr , 85 and he ordered 
the one who prayed badly to do likewise, saying to him after ordering him to 
prostrate for the second time, . .then raise your head and say takbir ” &6 He 
|fj also said to him, “[then do that in all your bowings and prostrations,] for 
if you do that, your prayer will be complete, and if you fall short in any of 
this, you will be deficient in your prayer .” 87 Also, he would sometimes 
raise his hands 88 with this takbir. 

7.16 The sitting of rest 

Next, he §f| would sit straight [on his left foot, upright, until every bone 
returned to its position ]. 89 

7.17 Supporting oneself with the hands on rising for the 
next rak ‘ah 

Next, he y would get up for the second rak'ah , supporting himself on the 
ground . 90 Also, he |§J would clench his fists 91 during prayer, supporting 
himself with his hands when getting up . 92 


Endnotes 

1. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

2. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

3. Abu Ya‘la in his Musnad (284/2) with a good isnad and Ibn Khuzay- 
mah (1/79/2) with a different, sahih isnad. 

4. Al-Nasa’I, al-Daraqutnl, and al-Mukhlis in al-Fawaid (1/2/2) with 
two sahih isnads. This raising of the hands has been reported from ten 
Companions, and a number of the Salaf viewed it as correct, among 
them Ibn ‘Umar, Ibn ‘Abbas, al-Hasan al-Basrl, Tawus, his son ‘Abd 
Allah, Naff the freed slave of Ibn ‘Umar, Salim the son of Ibn ‘Umar, 
Qasim bin Muhammad, ‘Abd Allah bin Dinar, and ‘Ata Mk>. Also, 
‘Abd al-Rahman bin Mahdl said, “This is from the Sunnah.” It was 
also practiced by the Imam of the Sunnah, Ahmad bin Hanbal, and 
it has been quoted from Malik and al-ShafiT. 

5. Ibn Khuzaymah (1/76/1), al-Daraqutnl, and al-Hakim who declared 
it sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. All the ahadith which contradict 
this are inauthentic. This way has been endorsed by Malik and simi¬ 
lar is reported from Ahmad in Ibn al-Jawzi’s al-Tahqiq (108/2). Also, 


no 



The Sujud 


m 


al-MarwazI quoted Imam al-Awza‘1 with a sahih isnad in his Masd’il 
(1/147/1) as saying, “I found the people placing their hands before 
their knees.” 

6. Abu Dawud, Tammam in al-Fawa’id, and al-Nasa’I in Sunan al-Sugh- 
rd and Sunan al-Kubrd (47/1) with a sahih isnad. ‘Abd al-Haqq de¬ 
clared it sahih in al-Ahkdm (54/1), and went on to say in Kitdb al- 
Tahajjud (561 1), “it has a better isnad than the previous one,” i.e. the 
hadith of Wa’il which is the other way round (knees before hands). 
In fact, the latter hadith, as well as being contradictory to this sahih 
hadith and the preceding one, is neither authentic in isnad nor in 
meaning, as I have explained in Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Da‘ifah (#929) 
and Irwd al-Ghalil (#357). 

It should be known that the way to differ from the camel is to place 
the hands before the knees, because the camel places its knees first; 
a camel’s knees are in its forelegs, as defined in Lisdn al-Arab and 
other books of the Arabic language, and as mentioned by al-TahawI 
in Mtishkil al-Athdr and Sharh Madni al-Athdr. Also, Imam Qasim al- 
Saraqusti narrated in Gharib al-Hadith (2/70/1-2), with a sahih isnad, 
Abu Hurayrah’s statement, “No one should kneel the way a run¬ 
away camel does,” and then added, “This is in sajdah. He is saying that 
one should not throw oneself down, as a runaway (or untamed) camel 
does, hurriedly and without calmness, but he should go down calmly, 
placing his hands first, followed by his knees, and an explanatory mar- 
fu. ‘ hadith has been narrated in this regard.” He then mentioned the 
hadith above. 

As for Ibn al-Qayyim’s extremely strange statement, “These words 
are incomprehensible, and not understood by the experts of the lan- 



The Sujud 


11 2 


guage,” it is answered by the sources which we have mentioned, and 
also many others which can be consulted. I have also expanded on 
this in the refutation against Shaykh al-Tuwayjarl, which may be pub¬ 
lished. 

7. Ibn Khuzaymah (1/79/2), Ahmad, and al-Siraj; Al-Hakim declared it 
sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#313). 

8. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

9. Ibn Khuzaymah, al-Bayhaql, and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and 
al-Dhahabl concurred. 

10. Al-Bayhaql with a sahih isnad. Ibn Abi Shaybah (1/82/2) and al-Siraj 
have related the pointing of the toes in a different narration. 

11. Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahih, as did Ibn al- 
Mulaqqin (27/2); it is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#309). 

12. Abu Dawud and al-Nasa’I with a sahih isnad. 

13. Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahih, as did Ibn al- 
Mulaqqin (27/2) it is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#309). 

14. Abu Dawud and Ahmad with sahih isnad. 

15. Ibn Khuzaymah (1/10/1) with a hasan isnad. 

16. Al-Daraqutnl, al-Tabaranl (3/140/1), and Abu Nuaym in Akhbdr 
Isbahdn. 



The Sujud 


113 

17. Al-BayhaqI with a sahih isnad. Ibn Abi Shaybah (1/82/2) and al-Siraj 
have related the pointing of the toes in a different narration. 

18. Al-BukharlandAbuDawud. IbnSa'd (4/157) related from Ibn‘Umar 
that he liked to point whatever of his body he could towards the qiblah 
when praying, even his thumbs. 

19. Al-Tahawl, Ibn Khuzaymah (#654), and al-Hakim who declared it 
sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

20. Al-BayhaqI with a sahih isnad. 

21. Al-TirmidhI and al-Siraj; Al-Hakim declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl 
concurred. 

22. This movement of the hand was deduced from the grammar of the 
Arabic text {Fath al-Bdri). 

23. i.e. to draw them in and prevent them from being scattered, mean¬ 
ing to gather the garment or hair with the hands for ruku and sujud 
(.Nihdyah ). This forbiddance is not only during prayer; the majority 
of scholars include tucking in the hair and garments before prayer in 
the prohibition. This is further strengthened by his forbidding men 
to pray with their hair tied, which follows later. 

24. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#310). 

25. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and Ibn Hibban. 

26. i.e. tied up or plaited. 



The Sujud 


114 

27. Muslim, Abu Awanah, and Ibn Hibban. Ibn al-Athlr says, “The mean¬ 
ing of this hadith is that were his hair loose, it would fall on the ground 
when in sajdafr, hence, the man would be rewarded for the prostration 
of the hair. However, if the hair is tied, it is effectively as though it 
did not prostrate, for he compared him to someone whose hands are 
shackled together, since they would then not lie on the ground in 
sajdahT 

It would seem that this instruction is limited to men and does not 
apply to women, as al-Shawkanl has quoted from Ibn al-‘Arabl. 

28. Abu Dawud and al-Tirmidhl who declared it hasan. Ibn Khuzaymah 
and Ibn Hibban declared it sahih. See Sahih Abi Dawiid (#653). 

29. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

30. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#3 59). 

31. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and Ibn Hibban. 

32. Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah with a hasan isnad. 

3 3. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

34. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, Abu Dawud, and Ahmad. 

3 5. Ahmad and al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahih. 

36. Ibn Khuzaymah (1/80/2), al-MaqdisI in al-Mnkhtdrah and al-Hakim 
who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 



The Sujud 


115 

37. Ahmad, Abu Dawud, Ibn Majah, al-Daraqutnl, al-TahawI, al-Bazzar, 
and al-Tabaranl in Mu jam al-Kabir on the authority of seven differ¬ 
ent Companions. See also the note on this dhikr under RukiT. 

38. See the previous note on this under Ruku also. 

39. Sahih, transmitted by Abu Dawud, al-Daraqutnl, al-Tabaranl, Ah¬ 
mad, and al-Bayhaql. 

40. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

41. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

42. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, al-TahawI, and al-Daraqutnl. 

43. Muslim and Abu‘Awanah. 

44. Ibn Nasr, al-Bazzar, and al-Hakim who declared it sahih but al-Dha- 
habi disagreed, however, it has a support which is mentioned in the 
manuscript version. 

45. Abu Dawud and al-Nasa’I with a sahih isnad. 

46. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, al-Nasa’I, and Ibn Nasr. 

47. Ibn Abl Shaybah (62/112/1) and al-Nasa’I; Al-Hakim declared it sahih 
and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

48. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and Ibn Abl Shaybah (12/106/2, 112/1). 

49. Ibid. 



The Sujud 


ii 6 

50. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and al-Bayhaql. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil 
(# 456 ). 

51. Al-Nasa’I, Ibn ‘Asakir (4/257/1-2), and al-Hakim who declared it 
sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

52. Ibn Khuzaymah in his Sahih, with a hasan isnad from Ibn Mas‘ud 
(887) and al-Bayhaql in mursal form. Ibn Khuzaymah prefixed it with, 
Chapter: Evidence that gesturing which is understood dtiringprayer nei¬ 
ther invalidates nor spoils the prayer —this action is one which the Peo¬ 
ple of Opinion have prohibited! In this regard, there are also ahadith 
in al-Bukharl, Muslim, and others. 

53. i.e. its color is pure black, with no other colors mixed with it [Ni- 
hdyah). 

54. The whiteness refers to that part of the horse where chains and bangles 
are put, including the lower legs but not the knees. 

55. i.e. the shining of the face due to the light of sujud. 

56. i.e. the shining of the parts covered in ablution: the face, hands, and 
feet. The shining marks of ablution on the face, hands, and legs of 
humans is compared to the whiteness of a horse’s face and legs. 

5 7. Ahmad with a sahih isnad. Al-TirmidhI related a part of it and declared 
it sahih. It is given in Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah. 

58. Al-Bukharl and Muslim; the hadith shows that the sinful from among 
those regular at prayer, will not remain the Fire forever; in fact, even 
those given to missing prayers out of laziness will not remain in the 



The Sujud 


117 

Fire forever; this is authentic. For more details, see Silsilah al-Ahddith 
al-Sahihah (#2054). 

59. Arabic al-Hasir\ a mat made of date-palm leaves or straw, etc. 

60. This was because his mosque was not covered with mats, etc. This is 
evident from a great many abdditb, such as the next one and the one 
of Abu SaTd later. 

61. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

62. Ahmad, al-Siraj, and al-Bayhaql, with a sahih isndd. 

63. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

64. Ibid. Arabic kbumrah : a piece of matting, palm-fiber, or other material 
which is big enough for a man to place his face on it in sajdafr, the 
term does not apply to larger pieces. 

65. Ibid. 

66. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. Arabic labiscv. usually means “to wear,” but 
here it is used to mean “to use,” i.e. to sit on; hence “wearing” includes 
“sitting on,” so this indicates that it is prohibited ( hardm ) to sit on silk, 
because of the prohibition on wearing it established in the Sahibs of 
al-Bukharl and Muslim, and others. In fact, a clear forbiddance of 
sitting on silk is related in these, so do not be confused by the fact 
that some leading scholars allow it. 

67. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 



The Sujud 


118 


68. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabi con¬ 
curred. 

69. To raise the hands here, and with every takbir, was a view voiced by 
Ahmad, as in Ibn al-Qayyim’s Bada’i'al-Fawa’id (3/89): “Al-Athram 
quoted from him (Imam Ahmad) that on being asked about raising 
the hands, he said: ‘With every movement down and up.’ Al-Athram 
said: ‘I saw Abu ‘Abd Allah (i.e. Imam Ahmad) raising his hands in 
prayer with every movement down and up.’ ” 

This was also the opinion of Ibn al-Mundhir and Abu ‘All of the Sha- 
fi‘Is, and also a view of Malik and al-Shafi‘I themselves, as in Tarh 
al-Tathrib. The raising of the hands here is also authentically reported 
from Anas bin Malik, Ibn ‘Umar, Nafi‘, Tawus, al-Hasan al-Basrl, Ibn 
Sirin, and Ayyub al-Sikhtianl Jl§fe, as in Musannaf Ibn Abi Sbaybah 
(1/106) with sahih narrations from them. 

70. Al-Bukharl in his Jnz Raf‘al-Yadayn, Abu Dawud with a sahih isnad, 
Muslim, and Abu ‘Awanah. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#316). 

71. Ahmad and Abu Dawud with a good isnad. 

72. Al-Bukharl and al-Bayhaql. 

73. Al-Nasa’I with a sahih isnad. 

74. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, Abu Shaykh in Md rawdha Abii al-Znbayr ‘an 
Ghayr Jdbir (#104-106), and al-Bayhaql. 

Ibn al-Qayyim overlooked this; after mentioning the Prophet’s A 
iftirdsh between the two sajdahs, he said, “No other way of sitting 
here is preserved from him!” How can this be correct, when iq‘d has 


The Sujud 


119 

reached us via the hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas ifs in Muslim, Abu Dawud, 
al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahih, and others (see Silsilah al-Ahadith 
al-Sahihah , #383); the hadith of Ibn ‘Umar t|§| with a hasan isnad 
in al-Bayhaql, declared sahih by Ibn Hajar. Also, Abu Ishaq al-Harbl 
related in Gharib al-Hadith (5/12/1) from Tawus, who saw Ibn ‘U- 
mar and Ibn ‘Abbas J?§a practicing iqa; its sanad is sahih. May Allah 
shower His Mercy on Imam Malik, who said, “Every one of us can re¬ 
fute and be refuted, except the occupant of this grave,” and he pointed 
to the grave of the Prophet | . This sunnah was practiced by several 
Companions, Successors, and others, and I have expanded on this in 
al-Asl. 

Of course, this iqa is different to the one which is forbidden, and 
follows under First Tashahhad. 

75. Abu Dawud and al-Bayhaql with a sahih isnad. 

76. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

77. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

78. Ibid. Ibn al-Qayyim said, “This sunnah was abandoned by the people 
after the time of the Companions. But as for the one who abides by the 
Sunnah, and does not glance sideways towards whatever contradicts 
it, he is unworried by anything opposing this guidance.” 

79. Abu Dawud, al-Tirmidhl, Ibn Majah, and al-Hakim who declared it 
sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 


The Sujud 


120 


80. Ibn Majah with a hasan sanad. Imam Ahmad chose to supplicate with 
this one; Ishaq bin Rahawayh said, “If he wishes, he can say this three 
times, or he can say ‘O Allah! Forgive me...,’ because both of them 
have been reported from the Prophet A between the two sajdabs .” 
{Masd’il of Imam Ahmad and Ishaq bin Rahawayh as related by Ishaq 
al-Marwazi, p. 19). 

81. This does not negate the validity of the expressions in the obligatory 
prayers due to the absence of anything to differentiate between those 
and voluntary prayers. This is the view of al-Shafi‘I, Ahmad, and Ishaq, 
who held that this was allowed in compulsory and voluntary prayers, 
as al-Tirmidhl has narrated. Imam al-TahawI has also taken this view 
in Mnshkil al-Athdr. Proper analysis supports this argument, for there 
is no position in prayer where a dhikr is not valid, and so it is fitting 
that this should be the case here. 

82. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

8 3. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahib and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred; the addition is from al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

84. Abu ‘Awanah and Abu Dawud with two sahib sanads. This raising of 
the hands is supported by Ahmad, Malik, and al-Shafi‘I in narrations 
from them. See the previous note under Sujud. 

85. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

86. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahib and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

87. Ahmad, and al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahib- 


The Sujud 


12 I 


88. Abu Awanah and Abu Dawud with sahih isnads. This was also the 
opinion of Imam Ahmad as well as Imams Malik and al-Shafi‘I with 
sahih sanads from them. Also see footnote #69. 

89. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. This sitting is known as Jalsah al-Istird- 
hah (the sitting of rest) by the scholars of fiqh. Al-Shafi‘i supported 
it, as did Ahmad in al-Tahqiq (m/i) and favored it more strongly, 
as is well-known of him that he would insist on following a sunnah 
which had nothing to contradict it. Ibn HanI said in his Masd’il al- 
Imdm Ahmad (p. 42), “I saw Abu ‘Abd Allah (i.e. Imam Ahmad) some¬ 
times leaning on his hands when standing up for the next rak'ah, and 
sometimes sitting straight and then getting up.” It was also the prefer¬ 
ence of Imam Ishaq bin Rahawayh, who said in Masd’il al-Marwazl 
(1 /147/2), “The example was set by the Prophet | of supporting him¬ 
self with his hands when getting up, whether he was old or young.” 
See also Irwd al-Ghalil (2/82-83). 

90. Al-Bukharl and al-Shafi‘I. 

91. literally, “as one who kneads dough.” 

92. Abu Ishaq al-Harbl with a faultless sanad, and its meaning is found 
in al-Bayhaql with a sahih sanad. As for the hadith, “He used to get 
up like an arrow, not supporting himself with his hands,” it is mawdii 
(fabricated), and all narrations of similar meaning are weak, not au¬ 
thentic, and I have explained this in Silsilah al-Ahadlth al-Da‘lfah 
(#562, #929, #968). 


Chapter Eight 


The Second Rak ‘ah 

When he got up for the second rak ‘ah, he would commence with «AU 
Praises be to Allah* (Quran, 1:1), without pausing. 1 

He would perform this rak‘ah exactly as he performed the first, except 
that he would make it shorter than the first, as mentioned before. 

8.1 The obligation of reciting al-Fatihah in every rak‘ah 

He ordered the one who prayed badly to recite al-Fatihah in every rak ‘ah, when 
he said to him after ordering him to recite it in the first rak‘ah , 2 then do that 
throughout your prayer 3 (in one narration: in every rak‘ah). A He also used to 
say, “There is recitation in every rak ‘ahP 


122 


Endnotes 

1. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. The pause negated in this badith could be 
a pause for reciting an opening supplication, and not include a pause 
for reciting the isti \ddhah , or it could be wider in meaning than that; 
I find the former possibility more convincing. There are two views 
among the scholars regarding the isti ‘ddbab, and we regard the correct 
one as being that it is to be said in every rak‘ab\ the details of all this 
are given in al-Asl. 

2. Abu Dawud and Ahmad with a strong sanad. 

3. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

4. Ahmad with a good isndd. 

5. Ibn Majah, Ibn Hibban in his Sahib, and Ahmad in Ibn Hani’s Masd ’il 
(1/52). Jabir bin Abd Allah said, “He who prays a rak'ah in which 
he does not recite the Mother of the Quran has not prayed, except 
behind an Imam”—related by Malik in Muwattd. 


123 



Chapter Nine 


The First Tashahhud 


Contents 

9.1 Moving the finger in tashahhud 125 

9.2 The obligation of the first tashahhud and the validity 
of supplication during it 126 

9.3 Manner of tashahhtid 126 

9.4 Sending prayers on the Prophet 129 

9.5 Notes about sending prayers on the Prophet 132 

9.6 Du a in the first tashahhud 145 

9.7 Standing up for the third, and then the fourth rak'ah 145 

9.8 Qunut in the five prayers because of a calamity 146 

9.9 Qunut in the Witr Prayer 147 
Endnotes 148 


Next, he . would sit for tashahhud after finishing the second rak'ah. In 
a two rak'ah prayer such as Fajr, he ; would sit muftarishan ,' as he used 
to sit between the two sajdahs, and he Sg would sit in the first tashahhud 
similarly 2 in a three- or four -rak'ah prayer. 

He also ordered the one who prayed badly thus, saying to him, “When 
you sit in the middle of the prayer, then be calm, spread your left thigh and 
perform tashahhud!’ 3 


1 24 




The First Tashahhud 


125 


Abu Hurayrah said, “My friend |§| forbade me from squatting (iqa) 
like a dog;” 4 in another hadith, “he : used to forbid the squatting of the 
devil.” 5 

When he |§| sat in tashahhud, he would place his right palm on his right 
thigh (in one narration: knee), and his left palm on his left thigh (in one 
narration: knee, spreading it upon it); 6 and he would put the end of his 
right elbow on his right thigh. 7 

Also, he 1 forbade a man who was sitting in prayer resting on his left 
hand, and said: “Verily, that is the prayer of the Jews;” 8 in one wording, 
“Do not sit like this, for indeed this is the way of sitting of those who are 
punished;” 9 in another hadith, “It is the sitting posture of those who incurred 
(Allah’s) anger.” 10 

9.1 Moving the finger in tashahhud 

He |§3 would spread his left palm on his left knee, clench all the fingers of his 
right hand, point with the finger adjacent to the thumb towards the qiblah, 
and fix his sight on it (i.e. the finger). 11 

Also, when he pointed with his finger, he would put his thumb on his 
middle finger, 12 and sometimes he would make a circle with these two. 13 

When he f raised his finger, he would move it, supplicating with it, 14 
and he 0 used to say, “It is surely more powerful against the devil than iron, 
meaning the forefinger.” 15 

Also, the Companions of the Prophet SS used to remind each other, that 
is, about pointing with the finger when supplicating. 16 

Once, he ij§ saw a man supplicating with two fingers, so he said, “Make 
it one, [make it one,]” and indicated with his forefinger. 17 

He |§s would do this in both tashahhuds. 1& 


The First Tashahhud 


126 


9.2, The obligation of the first tashahhud and the validity 
of supplication during it 

He m? would recite the Tahiyyah after every two rak'ahs ; 19 the first thing he 
would say in this sitting would be: “All compliments be to Allah.” 20 
When he forgot to perform the tashahhud after the first two rak'ahs, 
he would prostrate (twice) for forgetfulness. 21 

He IfJ used to order them to perform tashahhud, saying, “When you sit 
after every two rak'ahs, then say: Ail compliments...’ and then each of you 
should select the supplication he likes best and supplicate to Allah, Almighty 
and Sublime [with it];” 22 in another version: “Say, Ail compliments...’ in 
every sitting,” 23 and he |§| also ordered the one who prayed badly to do so, as 
has been mentioned. 

He II would teach them the tashahhud the way he taught them stirahs of 
the Quran, 24 and the Sunnah is to say it quietly. 25 


9.3 Manner of tashahhud 

He taught several ways of tashahhud. 


1. The tashahhud of Ibn Mas‘ud who said, “The Messenger of Allah 

Sj§ taught me the tashahhud, [with] my palm between his palms, the 
way he taught me sfirahs of the Quran: 


.AJ 


aist ^p\ 
i 5OJI 2IIc- j c-j llllc- 

obi Lu£ 3 all 'i 3 m3 


The First Tashahhud 


127 


‘All compliments, 26 prayers, 27 and pure words 28 are owed to Allah. 
Peace be on you, 29 O Prophet, and also the mercy of Allah and His 
blessings. 30 Peace be on us, and on the righteous slaves of Allah. [For 
when one says that, it includes every righteous slave in the heaven 
and the earth.] I bear witness that none has the right to be worshiped 
except Allah, and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave and 
messenger.’ 

This was while he was among us, but after he was taken, we would 
say: 

■ijp\ jp 

Peace be on the Prophet.’ ” 31 


2. The tashahhud of Ibn ‘Abbas t!$§§: “The Messenger of Allah |f| used to 
teach us the tashahhud the way he taught us [surahs of] the Quran; 
he used to say, 


.(i) 




*cp\ 1^1 ^[Jl] 

I ajj! jUp Jp3 fSLrJI] 

JuslSflail Mo' 


> > 0 " 


All compliments, blessed words, prayers, and pure words are due to 
Allah. Peace be on you, O Prophet, and also the mercy of Allah and 
His blessings. Peace be on us and on the righteous slaves of Allah. I 
bear witness that none has the right to be worshiped except Allah, 
and [I bear witness] that Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah (in 
one narration: .. .is His slave and messenger).”’ 32 


The First Tashahhud 


128 


3. The tashahhud of Ibn ‘Umar who reported the Messenger of Allah 

Hi as saying in the tashahhud : 





“All compliments, prayers, and good words are due to Allah. Peace be 
on you, O Prophet, and also the mercy of Allah.”—Ibn ‘Umar tsi§l 
said, “I add: 33 ‘...and His blessings.’ ” —“Peace be on us and on the 
righteous slaves of Allah. I bear witness that none has the right to be 
worshiped except Allah”—Ibn ‘Umar ifj said, “I add: 34 ‘...alone, He 
has no partner,’ ”—“and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave 
and messenger.” 35 

4. The tashahhud of Abu Musa al-Ash‘arI i|§s, who said that the Messen¬ 
ger of Allah : said, “.. .when you are sitting, the first thing each of 
you says should be: 



‘AH compliments, good words and prayers are due to Allah. Peace be 
on you, O Prophet, and also the mercy of Allah and His blessings. 
Peace be on us, and on the righteous slaves of Allah. I bear witness 


The First Tashahhud 


129 


that none has the right to be worshiped except Allah [alone, He has 


no partner], and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave and mes¬ 


senger.’ —seven phrases, and they are the greetings in the prayer.” 36 


5. The tashahhud of‘Umar bin al-Khattab ift,, who would teach the 
people the tashahhud while on the minbar , saying, “Say: 



‘All compliments are due to Allah; all pure titles are due to Allah; all 
good words [are due to Allah]. Peace be on you, O Prophet, and also 
the mercy of Allah and His blessings. Peace be on us and on the righ¬ 
teous slaves of Allah. I bear witness that none has the right to be wor¬ 
shiped except Allah, and I bear witness that Muhammad is His slave 
and messenger.’ ” 37 

9.4 Sending prayers on the Prophet ||f 

He §§§ used to send prayers on himself in the first tashahhud as well as the 
other. 38 He also established it for his Ummah, ordering them to send prayers 
on him after sending peace on him, 39 and he taught them several ways of 
doing so: 


The First Tasbabbud 


130 


1. 



“O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad, 40 and on his household, and 
on his wives and progeny, as you sent prayers on the family of Ibrahim; 
You are indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of Glory. And send blessings on 
Muhammad, 41 and on his household, and on his wives and progeny, 
as you sent blessings on the family of Ibrahim; You are indeed Worthy 
of Praise, Full of Glory.” This supplication he > would use himself. 42 



2. 


“O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad, and on the family of Muham¬ 
mad, as you sent prayers on [Ibrahim, and on] 43 the family of Ibra¬ 
him; You are indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of Glory. O Allah! Send 
blessings on Muhammad, and on the family of Muhammad, as you 
sent blessings on [Ibrahim, and on] 44 the family of Ibrahim; You are 
indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of Glory.” 45 


3 - 



The First Tashahhud 


131 


“O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad, and on the family of Muham¬ 
mad, as you sent prayers on Ibrahim, [and the family of Ibrahim]; 


You are indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of Glory. And send blessings 


on Muhammad, and on the family of Muhammad, as you sent bless¬ 
ings on [Ibrahim, and] the family of Ibrahim; You are indeed Worthy 
of Praise, Full of Glory.” 46 



4 - 


“O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad [the Unlettered Prophet], and 
on the family of Muhammad, as you sent prayers on [the family of] 
Ibrahim; and send blessings on Muhammad [the Unlettered Prophet] 
and the family of Muhammad, as you sent blessings on [the family of] 
Ibrahim among the nations; You are indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of 
Glory.” 47 



5 - 


“O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad, Your slave and messenger, 
as You sent prayers on [the family of] Ibrahim. And send blessings 
on Muhammad, [Your slave and messenger], [and on the family of 
Muhammad] as you sent blessings on Ibrahim [and on the family of 
Ibrahim].” 48 


The First Tashahhud 


132 


6. [(Jplj jp j-Q 

ci 1 * -(e)^l t ^p cp*.I -> ^ 
[jc-lj jp iljUj 
Ju^- iHj) tLjilJjj [jT] Jc- c-SjU US" 

“O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad, his wives and his progeny, as 
You sent prayers on [the family of] Ibrahim. And send blessings on 
Muhammad, his wives and his progeny, as You sent blessings on [the 
family of] Ibrahim; You are indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of Glory.” 49 

s-> ,r -r,, s~» 

7. (Jl A&J 

* g. . ^ 

dlj] t ft . & t3 ^ , ft -. Vc- l „S " 

“O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad and on the family of Muham¬ 
mad, and send blessings on Muhammad and on the family of Muham¬ 
mad, as you sent prayers and sent blessings on Ibrahim and the family 
of Ibrahim; You are indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of Glory.” 50 


jp 


.5 Notes about sending prayers on the Prophet 0 

1. It can be seen that in most of these ways of sending prayers on the 
Prophet - , there is no mention of Ibrahim separate from his fam¬ 
ily, the wording being, “...as you have sent prayers on the family of 
Ibrahim.” The reason for this is that in Arabic, the family of a man 
includes the man as well as his dependents, e.g. in the words of The 
Exalted, «AUah has chosen Adam, Nuh, the family of Ibrahim, and 
the family of‘Imran above all people.» (Quran, 3:33). 


The First Tashahhud 


133 


«We sent against them a violent tornado with showers of stones, ex¬ 
cept the family of Lut —We delivered them by early dawn.» (Quran, 
54:34); similar is his saying |§|, “O Allah! Send prayers on the family 
of Abu Awfa.” The phrase Ahl al-Bayt (People of the House) is also 
like this, e.g. «Allah’s grace and His blessings be on you, O People 
of the House.» (Quran, 11:73). Hence, Ibrahim is included in “the 
family of Ibrahim.” 

Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymlyyah says, 

Most of the versions have, “as you sent prayers on the fam¬ 
ily of Ibrahim” and “as you sent blessings on the family of 
Ibrahim;” some have “Ibrahim” himself. This is because 
he is the cause of all prayers and purifications on them; 
the rest of his family are secondary recipients of all that. 

To show these two points, both wordings have been em¬ 
ployed separately. 

Further, there is a well-known question among the people of knowl¬ 
edge about the nature of the comparison in his statement, “as you 
sent prayers on..for it is true that the model for comparison is nor¬ 
mally superior to the one being compared; here, the opposite is the 
case, since Muhammad is greater than Ibrahim, and so his superi¬ 
ority dictates that the prayers requested are more excellent than any 
prayers received or to be received by anyone else. The people of knowl¬ 
edge have provided many answers to this, and these can be found in 
Fath al-Bdri and Jala al-Ifhdm. They amount to about ten views, all 
of which are unsubstantiated, some weaker than others, except one, a 
well-supported view, and adopted by Shaykh al-Islam Ibn Taymiyyah 
and Ibn al-Qayyim. This view is: “The family of Ibrahim includes 


The First Tashahhud 


134 


many prophets; none like them is found in the family of Muhammad. 
Therefore, when prayers on the Prophet |§ and his family are sought 
similar to that bestowed on Ibrahim and his family, which includes 
prophets, the family of Muhammad receives out of that what is appro¬ 
priate for them. Since the family of Muhammad does not reach the 
rank of the prophets, the extra blessings and benefit given to the pro¬ 
phets, including Ibrahim, are left for Muhammad |f8. Thus he gains 
a distinguished position which others cannot reach.” 

Ibn al-Qayyim says, 

This is the best of all the previous views: that Muhammad 
Hi is one of the family of Ibrahim; in fact, he is the best of 
the family of Ibrahim, as ‘All bin Talhah has related from 
Ibn ‘Abbas lifg about the saying of The Exalted, «Allah has 
chosen Adam, Nuh, the family of Ibrahim, and the family 
of‘Imran above all people» (Quran, 3:33); Ibn ‘Abbas t$|§ 
said, “Muhammad is among the family of Ibrahim.” This 
is text for the fact that if other prophets descended from 
Ibrahim are included in his family, then the inclusion of 
the Messenger of Allah |§| is more fitting. Hence our say¬ 
ing, “...as you sent prayers on the family of Ibrahim,” in¬ 
cludes the prayers sent on him and on the rest of the pro¬ 
phets descended from Ibrahim. Allah has then ordered us 
to specifically send prayers on Muhammad and his family, 
as much as we send prayers on him, along with the rest of 
Ibrahim’s family generally. Therefore, the Prophets family 
receives out of that what is appropriate for them, leaving 
all of the remainder to him i§. There is no doubt that the 


The First Tashahhud 


135 


total amount of prayers received by Ibrahims family, with 
the Messenger of Allah |§J among them, is greater than 
that received by the Prophet |§ alone. Therefore, what is 
sought for him is such a great favor, definitely superior 
than that sought for Ibrahim. Hence, the nature of the 
comparison and its consistency become clear. The prayers 
sought for him with these words are greater than those re¬ 
quested any other way, since what is requested with the 
supplication is that it be as much as the model of com¬ 
parison, and that the Prophet ij§ receives a large portion: 
the comparison dictates that what is requested is more 
than what was given to Ibrahim and others. Thus, the ex¬ 
cellence and nobility of Muhammad |§|, over and above 
Ibrahim and his family, which includes many prophets, is 
evident, and is as he deserves. This sending of prayers on 
the Prophet £§ becomes evidence for this excellence of his, 
and this is no more than he deserves. So, may Allah send 
prayers on him and on his family, and send peace on them, 
many greetings of peace, and reward him from our suppli¬ 
cations better than He has rewarded any prophet from his 
people. O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad, and on the 
family of Muhammad, as you sent prayers on the family of 
Ibrahim; You are indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of Glory. 

And send blessings on Muhammad, and on the family of 
Muhammad, as you sent blessings on the family of Ibra¬ 
him; You are indeed Worthy of Praise, Full of Glory. 

The reader will see that this part of the prayer, with all its different 

types, is always a sending of prayers on the family of the Prophet |§J: 


The First Tashahhud 


136 


on his wives and children as well as himself. Therefore, it is neither 
from the Sunnah, nor carrying out the Prophet’s command, to leave 
it at “O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad” only. Rather, one of these 
complete types of supplication must be used, as is reported from his 
SI action, whether in the first or the last tasbabbud. There is text about 
this from Imam al-Shafi‘I in al-Umm\ “The tashahhud in the first and 
second instance is the same thing; by tashahhud, I mean the bearing 
of witness and the sending of prayers on the Prophet ; : neither will 
suffice without the other.” 

In fact, one of the most amazing things to arise from this age and its in¬ 
tellectual anarchy is that one person, Muhammad Is‘af al-Nashashlbl, 
in his book al-Islam al-Sahih (Tide Correct Islam), had the audacity to 
reject the sending of prayers on the family of the Prophet §| when 
sending prayers on him, despite it being firmly established in the 
Sahibs of al-Bukharl and Muslim, and elsewhere, on the authority 
of several Companions, e.g. Ka‘b bin ‘Ujrah, Abu Humayd al-Sa‘idI, 
Abu Sa‘ld al-Khudrl, Abu Mas'ud al-Ansarl, Abu Hurayrah and Tal- 
hah bin ‘Ubayd Allah ^^&! In their ahadith, it is found that they asked 
the Prophet T, “How do we send prayers on you?” so he taught them 
this way of doing so. Al-Nashashlbi’s supports his view by stating that 
Allah The Exalted did not mention anyone else with the Prophet 8§j 
in His saying: «0 you who believe! Send prayers on him, and salute 
him with all respect.» (Quran, 33:56) He then goes on to say in his 
refutation that the Companions asked him that question because 
the meaning of salah was known to them as supplication, so they were 
asking: “How can we supplicate to you?”! 

This is a clear deception, for their question was not about the meaning 
of salah on him, in which case he would have a point, but it was about 


The First Tashahhud 


137 


the manner of doing the saldh on him, as is found in the narrations to 
which we have referred. Thus it all fits, for they asked him about the 
way of doing it according to the Sharfah, something which they could 
not possibly find out except from the guidance of the All-Knowing, 
All-Wise, Giver of the saldh. Similarly, they could also ask him about 
the way of performing the Saldh made obligatory by words of The 
Exalted such as «Establish the Saldh (Prayer);» for their knowledge of 
the literal meaning of Saldh could not remove their need to ask about 
its manner according to the Sharfah, and this is crystal clear. 

As for al-Nashashlbl’s argument referred to, it is of no consequence, 
for it is well-known among the Muslims that the Prophet : v is the 
expounder of the words of the Lord of the Worlds, as He says: 

And We have sent down to you the Message, that you may 
explain clearly to the people what is sent for them, 

(Quran: al-Nahl 44) 

Hence, the Prophet iji explained the way of doing saldh on him, and 
it included mention of his family, so it is compulsory to accept that 
from him, due to Allah’s saying: 

«So take what the Messenger gives you» (Quran, 59:7), and the well- 
known authentic hadith, “Verily, I have been given the Quran and 
something similar to it.” 51 

I really wonder what al-Nashashlbl and those taken in by his pompous 
words would say if someone were to reject the tashahhud in prayer alto¬ 
gether, or reject the menstruating woman’s abstaining from prayer and 


The First Tashahhud 


138 


fasting, all with the argument that Allah The Exalted did not mention 
the tashahhud in the Quran; He only mentioned bowing and prostra¬ 
tion, and He did not exempt a menstruating woman from prayer and 
fasting in the Quran! So, do they agree with such arguments, which 
are along the lines of his original one, or not? If they do, and we hope 
not, then they have strayed far, far away from guidance, and have left 
the mainstream of the Muslims; if they do not, then they are correct in 
agreeing with us, and their reasons for rejecting those arguments are 
exactly the same as our reasons for rejecting al-Nashashibi’s original 
pronouncement, which we have explained clearly. 

Therefore beware, O Muslims, of trying to understand the Quran 
without recourse to the Sunnah, for you will never be able to do that, 
even if you were the Slbawayh 52 of the age; the expert of the age in 
the Arabic language. Here is an example in front of you, for this al- 
Nashashlbl is one of the leading scholars of the Arabic language of 
this period; you have seen how he has strayed, after being deceived by 
his knowledge of the language, by not seeking the aid of the Sunnah 
in understanding the Quran; in fact he has rejected this aid, as you 
know. There are many other examples of this—there is not enough 
room here to mention them, but what we have mentioned will suf¬ 
fice, and Allah is the Granter of all capability. 

The reader will also see that in none of these types of saldh on the Pro¬ 
phet H is there the word sayyid (chief, leader). The later scholars have 
differed about the validity of its inclusion in the Ihrdhimi saldh. Due 
to lack of space we will not go into the details of that nor make men¬ 
tion of those who rejected its validity in keeping with the Prophet’s |§J 
complete teaching to his Ummah when he instructed, “Say: O Allah! 


The First Tashahhud 


139 


Send prayers on Muhammad...” on being asked about the manner 
of saldb on him, but we will quote al-Hafiz Ibn Hajr al-‘AsqalanI on 
this, bearing in mind his position as one of the great Shafi‘1 scholars of 
both baditb and fiqh, for contradiction of this teaching of the Prophet 
i§ has become widespread among Shafi‘1 scholars! 

Al-Hafiz Muhammad bin Muhammad bin Muhammad al-Ghurablll 
(ah 790-835), a companion of Ibn Hajr, said, and I quote from his 
manuscript: 53 

He (i.e. Ibn Hajr), may Allah benefit us with his life, was 
asked about the features of saldb on the Prophet |j§, whe¬ 
ther during prayer or outside it, compulsory or recom¬ 
mended: Is one of its conditions that the Prophet be 
attributed with sayddab (leadership), e.g. “O Allah! Send 
prayers on sayyidind (our leader) Muhammad...” or “the 
foremost of creation,” or “the leader of the children of 
Adam,” etc.? or should one stick to “O Allah! Send prayers 
on Muhammad”? Which of these two is the better ap¬ 
proach: including the word sayyid, due to it being an es¬ 
tablished attribute of the Prophet |§|, or leaving it out due 
to the absence of it in the narrations? He (Ibn Hajr), may 
Allah be pleased with him, replied: Yes, to follow the nar¬ 
rated wording is superior. It cannot be said, “Maybe the 
Prophet i| himself did not say it out of modesty, just as he 
did not say ill J** on mention of his name, although 

his Ummah has been encouraged to do so” — for we say 
that if that were superior, it would have been quoted from 
the Companions and then from the Successors, but 


The First Tashahhud 


140 


we do not come across it in any narrations from any Com¬ 
panion or Successor. This is despite the volume of quo¬ 
tations from them. We have Imam al-Shafi‘I, may Allah 
exalt his rank, one of the foremost among men in his re¬ 
spect for the Prophet |f§, saying in the preface to his book 
which is a base for the people of his madhhab : “O Allah! 
Send prayers on Muhammad.. .etc.” until the end of what 
his judgment dictated, “...every time one of the remem¬ 
berers remembers him, and every time one of the heedless 
fails to remember him,” which he seems to have deduced 
from the authentic hadith which has in it that the Prophet 
H§ saw the Mother of the Believers engaging in long and 
numerous glorifications, so he said to her, “You have said 
words which, if weighed against the following, would be 
balanced: ‘Glorified be Allah, as many times as the number 
of His creation;’ ” He |§§ used to like supplications which 
were concise, but exhaustive in meaning. Al-Qath ‘Iyaci set 
out a chapter about saldh on the Prophet |j§ in his book 
al-Shifd (The Book of Cure), noting in it narrations from 
the Prophet |j§ on the authority of several Companions 
and Successors; in none of these is the word sayyid 
reported: 

a. The hadith of ‘All i^,, that he used to teach them 
the manner of saldh on the Prophet ; by saying, 
“O Allah, Spreader of Plains, Originator of Heights, 
send the foremost of Your prayers, the most fertile of 
Your blessings, and any remaining compliments, on 


The First Tashahhud 


141 


Muhammad, Your slave and messenger, the opener 
of what is closed.” 

b. Again from ‘All that he used to say, “The prayers 
of Allah, the Beneficent, the Merciful, of the Angels 
nearest (to Allah), of the Prophets, of the Sincere ones, 
of the Witnesses, of the Righteous, and of whatever 
glorifies You, O Lord of the Worlds, be on Muham¬ 
mad son of ‘Abd Allah, Seal of the Prophets, Imam 
of the God-fearing.. .etc.” 

c. On the authority of‘Abd Allah bin Mas'ud «§&, that 
he used to say, “O Allah! Send Your prayers, Your 
blessings and Your mercy, on Muhammad, Your slave 
and messenger, the Imam of goodness, the messenger 
of mercy... etc.” 

d. From al-Hasan al-Basrl, that he used to say, “Who¬ 
ever wants to drink from the cup which quenches, 
from the fount of al-Mustafa, should say: ‘O Allah! 
Send prayers on Muhammad, and on his family, his 
Companions, his wives, his children, his descendants, 
his household, his in-laws, his helpers, his followers, 
and all those who love him.’ ” 

This is what he (al-Qadl ‘Iyaci) has written in al-Sbifd, re¬ 
garding the manner of saldh on the Prophet |§J, on the 
authority of the Companions and those who succeeded 
them, and he also mentioned other things in it. Yes, it is 


The First Tashahhud 


142 


related in a hadith of Ibn Mas‘ud that in his saldh on 
the Prophet |§|, he would say, “O Allah! Send the best of 
Your prayers, mercy and blessings on the sayyid (leader) of 
the messengers...etc.” transmitted by Ibn Majah, but its 
isnad is weak, so the hadith of ‘Alltransmitted by al- 
Tabaranl with a acceptable isnad, takes precedence. This 
hadith has difficult words, which I have reported and ex¬ 
plained in the book Fadl al-Nahi (Excellence of the Prophet 
$$§) by Abu al-Hasan ibn al-Faris. Some Shaffils have said 
that if a man took an oath to send the best saldh on the 
Prophet ifi, the way to fulfill his oath would be to say, 
“O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad every time the re¬ 
memberers remember him or the heedless fail to remem¬ 
ber him;” Imam al-Nawawi said, “The one which is most 
fitting to be designated as correct is that one should say: 
‘O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad, and on the family 
of Muhammad, as you sent prayers on Ibrahim...’” Sev¬ 
eral of the later scholars have replied to this by saying that 
in neither of the two ways mentioned above is there any¬ 
thing to prove which is superior as regards narration, but 
as regards the meaning, then the former is clearly superior. 
This issue is well-known in the books of fiqh, and of all the 
scholars of fiqh who addressed this issue, without excep¬ 
tion, in none of their words does the word sayyid appear. 
Had this additional word been commendable, it would 
not have escaped all of them, leaving them ignorant of it. 
All good is in following what is narrated, and Allah knows 
best. 


The First Tashahhud 


143 


Ibn Hajr’s view of the unacceptability of describing the Prophet iff as 
sayyid during the saldh on him in accordance with the Quranic order, 
is also that of the Hanafi scholars. It is the view which must be adhered 
to, for it is a true indication of love for him iff; 



Say: If you do love Allah, then follow me. Allah will love 
you. (Quran: Al ‘Imran 31) 

Because of this, Imam al-NawawI said in Rawdab al-Tdlibin (1/265), 
“The most complete saldh on the Prophet iff is: ‘O Allah! Send your 
prayers on Muhammad...etc.’” corresponding to type 3 given, in 
which there is no mention of sayyidl 

It should be known that types 1 and 4 are the ones which the Mes¬ 
senger of Allah jf| taught his Companions when they asked about the 
manner of saldh on him, so this has been used as evidence that these 
are the best ways of doing the saldh on him, for he would not choose 
anything for them or himself except the best and noblest. Imam al- 
Nawawi, as mentioned, endorsed (in Rawdab al-Tdlibin ) that if a man 
were to take an oath to do the best possible saldh on the Prophet Q, 
this could not be fulfilled except in these ways. 

Al-Subkl has given another reason: “Whoever does saldh with those 
types has made saldh on the Prophet Hi with certainty, and whoever 
does so with other words is in doubt whether or not he has performed 
the prayers as requested. This is because they said, ‘How do we send 
prayers on you?’ and he replied, ‘Say: ...,’ thus defining their saldh 
on him as their saying such-and-such.” This was mentioned by al- 
Haytami in al-Darr al-Mandiid (25/2); he then said (27/1) that the 


The First Tashahhud 


144 


objective is achieved with all the types which have occurred in authen¬ 
tic ahadith. 

5. It should be known that it is not valid to combine all these way into 
one way of saldh, and the same goes for the different tashahhuds given 
previously. In fact, that would be an innovation in the religion; the 
Sunnah is to say different ones at different times, as Shaykh al-Islam 
Ibn Taymlyyah has explained in his discussion of the takbirs of the 
two Eids [Majmu al-Fatdwd, 29/253/1). 

6. ‘Allamah Siddlq Hasan Khan says in his book Nuzul al-Abrdr bi al- 
‘Ilm al-Ma ’thiir min al-Ad‘iyah wa al-Adhkar, after giving many ahd- 
dith about the excellence of repeated saldh on the Prophet |f§ (p. 161): 

“There is no doubt that the foremost among the Muslims in sending 
saldh on him ■ are the People of Hadlth and the narrators of the pu¬ 
rified Sunnah, for it is one of their duties in this noble branch of learn¬ 
ing to make saldh on him before every hadlth, and so their tongues 
are always engaged in his mention, may Allah grant him mercy and 
peace. There is no book of Sunnah or collection of hadlth, be it a 
jdmi‘, mnsnad, mujam, juz, etc. except that it comprises thousands 
of ahadith-, even one of the least bulky ones, al-Suyuti’s al-]dmi al- 
Saghlr, contains ten thousand ahadith, and the rest of the collections 
are no different. So this is the Saved Sect: the body of the People of 
Hadlth, who will be the closest among men to the Messenger of Allah 
HI on the Day of Resurrection, and the most likely to be rewarded 
by his intercession if!, may my mother and father be sacrificed for 
him! This excellence of the People of Hadlth cannot be surpassed by 
anyone unless he does more than what they do, something which is 
well-nigh impossible. Therefore, O desirer of good, seeker of salva- 


The First Tashahhud 


145 


tion, no matter what, you should either be a muhaddith, or be close 
to the muhaddithin-, do not be otherwise...for apart from that there 
is nothing which will benefit you.” 

I ask Allah, Blessed and Exalted, to make me one of these People of 
Hadith, who are the closest among men to the Messenger of Allah ; per¬ 
haps this book will be a testimony to that. May Allah shower His mercy on 
Imam Ahmad, who recited: 

The religion of Muhammad is in narrations, 

The best mounts for a young man are the traditions; 

Turn not away from Hadith and its people, 

For Opinion is night, while Hadith is day, 

A young man can be ignorant of the guidance... 

Although the sun is shining in all its splendor! 

9.6 Du ‘a in the first tashahhud 

He S§§ also set the guidance of dud in this tashahhud as well, saying, “When 
you sit after every two rak\dhs , then say: All compliments are due to Allah 
(till the end of that supplication, and then said:) .. .then he should select of 
the supplications what is most pleasing to him.” 54 

9.7 Standing up for the third, and then the fourth rak‘ah 

Next, he - would get up for the third rak‘ab with takhir , 55 and he ordered 
the one who prayed badly to do so. And then do that in every rak‘ah, as before. 
When he §§ stood from the sitting position, he would say takhir, and then 
stand up; 56 and he would raise his hands 57 with this takhir sometimes. 


The First Tashahhud 


146 


When he js wanted to stand up for the fourth rak ‘ah, he would say: “Allah 
is the Greatest,” 58 and he ordered the one who prayed badly likewise, as before, 
and he |f§ would raise his hands 59 with this takbir sometimes. 

He -f would sit up straight on his left foot, at ease, until every bone re¬ 
turned to its proper place, then stand up, supporting himself on the ground; 
and he would clench his fists, 60 supporting himself with his hands when 
standing up. 61 

He ;would recite al-Fdtihah in both these rak'ahs, and he ordered the 
one who prayed badly to do that. In Zuhr prayer, he |§|* would sometimes 
add a few dydt to this, as has been explained under Recitation of dydt after 
al-Fdtihah in the last two rak'ahs. 

9.8 Quniit in the five prayers because of a calamity 

When he |§3 wanted to supplicate against someone, or supplicate for some¬ 
one, he would perform quniit 62 in the last rak'ah, after ruku‘\ after having 
said: “Allah listens to the one who praises Him.” 63 He y would supplicate 
loudly, 64 raise his hands, 65 and those behind him would say: dmin . 66 

He was known to perform quniit in all five prayers, 67 although he 
would only perform quniit in them when he supplicated for a people or 
supplicated against a people. 68 For example, he once said, “O Allah! Res¬ 
cue al-Walld bin al-Walld, and Salamah bin Hisham, and Ayyash bin Abi 
Rabfah. O Allah! Harden Your penalty on (the tribe of) Mudar, and cause 
for it years (of famine) like the years of Yusuf. [O Allah! Curse Lahyan; and 
Ru’l; and Dhakwan; and ‘Usayyah, who disobeyed Allah and His Messen¬ 
ger!] ” 69 Then, he would say: “Allah is the Greatest” when he had finished 
quniit and prostrate. 70 


The First Tashahhud 


147 


9.9 Qunut in the Witr Prayer 

He used to perform qiimit in the (odd) rak‘ah of the Witr prayer ” 71 some¬ 
times , 72 and he would perform it before mkii ‘, 73 He taught al-Hasan bin ‘All 
tj|§§ to say [after finishing his recitation in Witr \: 



“O Allah! Guide me among those whom You have guided; and pardon me 
among those who You have pardoned; and turn on me in friendship among 
those on whom You have turned in friendship; and bless me in what You 
have bestowed; and save me from the evil of what You have decreed; [for] 
indeed You decree, and none can influence You; [and] he is not humiliated 
whom You have befriended; [nor is he honored who is Your enemy.] Blessed 
are You, O Lord, and Exalted. [There is no place of safety from You except 
towards You .]” 74 


Endnotes 

1. Al-Nasa’I (1/173) with a sahih isnad. 

2. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

3. Abu Dawud and al-Bayhaql with a good sanad. 

4. Al-TayalisI, Ahmad, and Ibn Abi Shaybah. About iq‘a, Abu ‘Ubaydah 
and others said, “It is when a man presses his buttocks against the 
ground, keeps his shins upright, and leans his hands on the ground, 
the way a dog does.” This is different from the iqa between sajdahs, 
which is approved in the Sunnah, as covered previously. 

5. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and others. See Irwd al-Ghalil (#316). 

6. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

7. Abu Dawud and al-Nasa I with a sahih sanad. It is as though the mean¬ 
ing is that he would not separate his elbows from his side, as Ibn al- 
Qayyim has elucidated in Zad al-Ma ‘ad. 

8. Al-Bayhaql and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. It is given, as well as the next one, in Irwd al-Ghalil (#380). 


148 



The First Tashahhud 


149 


9. Ahmad and Abu Dawud with a good isnad. 

1 o. ‘Abd al-Razzaq; ‘Abd al-Haqq declared it sahih in his Ahkdm (# 1284— 
with my recension). 

11. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, and Ibn Khuzaymah. Al-Humaydl (13/1) and 
Abu Ya‘la (275/2) added with a sahih sanad on the authority of Ibn 
‘Umar ti$§S: “and this is the shooting of the devil; no one will forget 
when he does this,” and al-Humaydl raised his finger. Al-Humaydi 
also said that Muslim bin Abi Maryam said, “A man related to me 
that in a church in Syria, he saw images of Prophets depicted like 
this,” and al-Humaydl raised his finger. This is an extremely strange 
remark, but its sanad up to “the man” is sahih. 

12. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

13. Abu Dawud, al-Nasa I, Ibn al-Jarud in al-Mnntaqd (208), Ibn Khuza¬ 
ymah (1/86/1-2), and Ibn Hibban in his sahih (485) with a sahih 
sanad. Ibn al-Mulaqqln also declared it sahih (28/2), and it has a sup¬ 
porting narration in Ibn ‘Adi (287/1). 

14. Ibid. About “supplicating with it,” Imam al-TahawI said, “This is ev¬ 
idence that it was at the end of the prayer.” Hence, there is evidence 
in this that the Sunnah is to continue pointing and moving the fin¬ 
ger until the taslim, for the supplication is until then. This is the view 
of Malik and others. Imam Ahmad was asked, “Should a man point 
with his finger during prayer?” He replied, “Yes, vigorously.” (Men¬ 
tioned by Ibn HanI in his Masd’ilal-Imdm Ahmad, 1/80). From this, 
it is clear that moving the finger in tashahhud is a proven snnnah of 
the Prophet U, and it was practiced by Ahmad and other Imams of 


The First Tashahhud 


150 


the Sunnah. Therefore, those who think that it is pointless and irrel¬ 
evant and has nothing to do with the prayer, should fear Allah, since 
because of this, they do not move their fingers although they know it 
to be an established sunnah, and they take great pains to interpret it 
in a way which is inconsistent with the Arabic way of expression and 
contrary to the understanding of the Imams with regard to it. 

The amazing thing is that some of them will defend an Imam on other 
issues, even if his opinion conflicts with the Sunnah, with the argu¬ 
ment that to point out the Imam’s mistakes inevitably means to taunt 
and disrespect him. They then forget this and reject this established 
sunnah, at the same time mocking at those who practice it. Whether 
or not they realize it, their mockery also includes those Imams whom 
they often defend wrongly, and who are correct about the Sunnah 
this time! In fact, they are deriding the Prophet 7 himself, for he is 
the one who brought us this sunnah, and so jeering at it is equivalent 
to jeering at him. «But what is the reward for those among you who 
behave like this except...» (Quran, 2:85). 

As for putting the finger down after pointing, or limiting the move¬ 
ment to the affirmation (saying Id ildha\ “there is no god...”) and 
negation (saying: illalldhu: “...except Allah”), all of that has no ba¬ 
sis in the Sunnah; in fact, it is contrary to the Sunnah, as this baditb 
proves. 

Further, the baditb that he would not move his finger does not have an 
authentic isnad, as I have explained in Da‘ifAbiDawiid (175). Even if 
it were authentic, it is negatory, while the baditb above is affirmatory: 
the affirmatory takes precedence over the negatory, as is well-known 
among the scholars. 


The First Tashahhud 


151 

15. Ahmad, al-Bazzar, Abu Ja‘far al-Bukhtlrl in al-Amdli (60/1), ‘Abd al- 
Ghanl al-MaqdisI in his Siman (12/2) with a hasan sanad, al-Ruyanl 
in his Musnad (249/2), and al-Bayhaql. 

16. Ibn Abi Shaybah (2/123/2) with a hasan sanad. 

1 7. Ibn Abi Shaybah (12/40/1, 2/123/2) and al-Nasa’I. It was declared 
sahih by Al-Hakim and al-Dhahabl concurred. There is a supporting 
narration for it in Ibn Abi Shaybah. 

18. Al-Nasa’I and al-Bayhaql with a sahih sanad. 

19. Muslim and Abu‘Awanah. 

20. Al-Bayhaql transmitted it as a narration from ‘A’ishah ij^, with a good 
isnad, as verified by Ibn al-Mulaqqin (28/2). 

21. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#338). 

22. Al-Nasa’I, Ahmad, and al-Tabarani in Midjam al-Kahir (3/25/1) with 
a sahih sanad. The literal meaning of the hadith is evidence for the 
validity of supplication in every tashahhud, even the one not adjacent 
to the taslim, and this is the view of Ibn Hazm. 

23. Al-Nasa’I with a sahih sanad. 

24. Al-Bukhari and Muslim. 

25. Abu Dawud and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 



The First Tashahhud 


152 


26. Arabic tahiyydt\ i.e. “all words which imply peace, sovereignty, and 
eternity, are due to Allah.” ( Nihdyah) 

27. Arabic salawdt-. i.e. “all supplications which are used to glorify the 
majesty of Allah, for He is fully entitled to them, and none but Him 
is worthy of them.” ( Nihdyah ) 

28. Arabic tayyihdt-. i.e. “all good and pure words suitable for praising Al¬ 
lah, not those ones incompatible with his attributes with which kings 
were greeted.” (Fath al-Bdri) 

29. Meaning, seeking of refuge with Allah and being strengthened by him, 
since al-Saldm (Peace) is actually a name of Allah. Hence, the greeting 
effectively means: “Allah be a watcher and safeguard over you.” Simi¬ 
larly, it is said, “Allah be with you,” i.e. in His safeguarding, help, and 
favor. 

30. A term for all the good continuously emanating from Allah. 

31. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, Ibn Abi Shaybah (1/90/2), al-Siraj, and Abu 
Ya‘la in his Musnad (258/2). It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#321). 

Ibn Masud’s ift, statement, “We said: Peace be on the Prophet” clari¬ 
fies that the Companions used to say, “Peace be on you, O Prophet,” 
in tashahhud while the Prophet gfj was alive, but when he died, they 
ceased to do that, instead saying, “Peace be on the Prophet.” Undoubt¬ 
edly, this was with the endorsement of the Prophet A; this is sup¬ 
ported by the fact that ‘A’ishah would similarly teach the tashah¬ 
hud in prayer with “Peace be on the Prophet,” as transmitted by al- 
Siraj in his Musnad (9/1/2) and al-Mukhlis in al-Fawa’id (11/54/1) 
with two sahih isnads from her. 


The First Tashahhud 


153 


Ibn Hajar says, “This addition shows clearly that they used to say 
‘Peace be on you, O Prophet,’ addressing him directly during his life, 
but when the Prophet |§ died, they stopped addressing him and men¬ 
tioned him in the third person instead, saying ‘Peace be on the Pro¬ 
phet.’ ” He also says in a different place, “Al-Subkl said in Sharh al- 
Minhdj, after mentioning this narration from Abu ‘Awanah only, ‘If 
this is authentically-reported from the Companions, it proves that af¬ 
ter his time, it is not compulsory to address the Prophet directly in 
the greeting of peace, so one says: “Peace be on the Prophet.” ’ ” Ibn 
Hajar continues: “This is authentic without doubt (i.e. because it is 
established in Sahih al-Bukhdri), and I have also found strong support 
for it: ‘Abd al-Razzaq said: Ibn Jurayj informed me: ‘Ata informed me 
that the Companions used to say ‘Peace be on you, O Prophet’ while 
the Prophet % was alive, but after he died, they would say ‘Peace be 
on the Prophet,’ and this is a sahih isndd. As for Sa‘ld bin Mansur’s nar¬ 
ration from Abu ‘Ubaydah bin ‘Abd Allah bin Mas'ud, who reported 
from his father that the Prophet if§ taught them the tashahhud, and 
then he (‘Abd Allah bin Mas'ud ajj§fe) said it (the tashahhud)-, Ibn ‘Ab¬ 
bas said: We used to say ‘Peace be on you, O Prophet’ only while 
he was alive, to which Ibn Mas'ud ift, replied, ‘This is how we were 
taught, and this is how we teach it,’ it would appear that Ibn ‘Abbas 
i|§l said this as a matter of discussion but Ibn Mas'ud did not 
accept. However, the narration of Abu Ma‘mar (i.e. the narration of 
al-Bukharl) is more authentic, since Abu ‘Ubaydah did not hear {ahd- 
dith ) from his father, and furthermore, the isndd up to Abu ‘Ubaydah 
is weak.” 

These words of Ibn Hajar have been quoted by several scholars in 
their analysis, e.g. al-Qastalanl, al-Zarqanl, al-TaknawI, etc. They all 


The First Tashahhud 


154 


chose to give his words without commenting further. This discussion 
is treated comprehensively in al-Asl. 

3 2. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, al-Shafi‘1, and al-Nasa I. 

33. See next note. 

34. These two additions have been proved to be part of the tashahhud 
from the Prophet l . Ibn ‘Umar ti§i, did not add them of his own 
accord (far is he above such a thing!); in fact, he learned them from 
other Companions who reported them from the Prophet A, and he 
then added them to the tashahhud which he heard from the Prophet 
H directly. 

35. Abu Dawud and al-Daraqutnl who declared it sahih. 

3 6 . Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, Abu Dawud, and Ibn Majah. 

37. Malik and al-Bayhaql with sahih isnads. Although this hadith is maw- 
qiif, it is effectively marfu ‘, for it is known that this sort of thing is 
not said from personal opinion, since it were so, it would be no better 
than any other sayings of dhikr, as Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr has said. 

Note: In none of the types of tashahhud is there the addition: wa 
maghfiratuha (“...and His forgiveness”), so one should not be accus¬ 
tomed to it. Hence some of the Salaf rebuked it, as the following 
narrations show: 

It is reported from Talhah bin Musarrifwho said: Rabl‘ bin Khaytham 
added during tashahhud, “...and His blessings, and His forgiveness”! 
So ‘Alqamah said, “We stop where we were taught: ‘Peace be upon 
you, O Prophet, and also the mercy of Allah and His blessings;’ ” 


The First Tashahhud 


155 


‘Alqamah was actually following the example of his teacher ‘Abd Al¬ 
lah bin Mas‘ud d§s, from whom it is authentically reported that he 
was teaching a man the tasbabbud : when he got to “I bear witness 
that there is no (true) god except Allah...,” the man said: “alone, He 
has no partner,” to which ‘Abd Allah ift, said, “He is so, but we stop 
at where we were taught.” Transmitted by al-Tabaranl in Mu jam al- 
Awsat (#2848, 3/56/1) with a sahib isndd. 

38. Abu ‘Awanah in his sahib (2/324) and al-Nasal. 

39. They had said, “O Messenger of Allah, we have been taught how to 
send peace on you (i.e. in tasbabbud), but how do we send prayers 
on you?” He said, “Say: O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad.. .etc.” 
Thus he did not specify one tasbabbud to the exclusion of another, so 
there is evidence here to establish sending prayers on him in the first 
tasbabbud also. This is the way of Imam al-Shafi‘I, as in his book al- 
Umm, and it is held to be correct by his companions, as al-NawawI has 
explained in al-MajmiT (3/460) and supported in Rawdab al-Tdlibin 
(1/263). h is also the view of al-WazIr bin Hubayrah al-Hanball in 
al-Ifidh, as Ibn Rajab has quoted and strongly supported in Dhayl al- 
Tabaqdt (1/280). Many ahddith exist about sending prayers on him 
Hj§ in tasbabbud', in none of them is there any such specification men¬ 
tioned. In fact, these ahddith are general, hence including every tashah¬ 
hud, and I have given them in al-Asl as ta ‘liq, but not in the main text, 
for they do not satisfy our conditions for authenticity. However, they 
do support each other in meaning, and those who reject and oppose 
this have no authentic evidence to use as proof, as I have detailed in al- 
Asl. Similarly, to say that adding anything to “O Allah! Send prayers 
on Muhammad” is makriih has no basis in the Sunnah, nor is there any 


The First Tashahhud 


156 


convincing proof for it. In fact, we see that whoever says this does not 
implement the previous instruction of the Prophet | fj, “Say: O Allah! 
Send prayers on Muhammad, and on the family of Muhammad.. 
there is more to this discussion in al-Asl. 

40. One of the earliest views about the meaning of “sending prayers on 
the Prophet |§J” is that of Abu al-‘Aliyah (with reference to Surah al- 
Ahzab, 33:56): “Allah’s sending prayers on his Prophet means His ex¬ 
alting him and raising his rank; the Angels and others sending prayers 
means their seeking this from Allah, and here it is meant asking the 
prayers to be increased, not asking for the original prayer in itself.” 

Ibn Hajar quoted this in Fath al-Bdri, and went on to refute the 
widespread notion that the Lord’s prayer on someone is His Mercy; 
Ibn al-Qayyim also clarified this in Jala al-Afhdm, leaving little scope 
for further comment. 

41. From barakah. growth, increase. Hence this supplication secures for 
Muhammad the good which Allah granted to the family of Ibrahim, 
continual, established good, as well as its multiplication and increase. 

42. Ahmad and al-TahawI with a sahih sanad. 

43. See next note. 

44. These two additions are conclusively found in al-Bukharl, al-Tahawi, 
al-Bayhaql, Ahmad, and al-Nasa’I. They also exist via different routes 
of narration in other types of this supplication (see #3 and #7), and so 
do not be confused by Ibn al-Qayyim’s view in Jala al-Afhdm (p. 198), 


The First Tashahhud 


157 


following in the footsteps of his great teacher Ibn Taymlyyah in al- 
Fatdwd (1/16), “There is no authentic hadith with the phrases Ibra¬ 
him’ and ‘the family of Ibrahim’ together;” here, we have shown you 
such authentic ahadith. Ibn al-Qayyim’s error is further established 
by the fact that he himself declared #7 sahib, which contains what he 
denied above! 

45. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, al-Humaydl (138/1), and Ibn Mandah (68/2) 
who said, “There is consensus on this hadith being authentic.” 

46. Ahmad, al-Nasa’I, and Abu Ya‘la in his Musnad (44/2) with a sahib 
sanad. 

47. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, IbnAbl Shaybah (2/132/1), and Abu Dawud; 
Al-Hakim declared it sahib. 

48. Al-Bukharl, al-Nasa’I, al-TahawI, Ahmad, and Ismail al-Qadlin Fadl 
al-Saldh 'aid Nabi (p. 28, I st ed.; p. 62, 2 nd ed.—with my check¬ 
ing)- 

49. Al-Bukharl, Muslim, and al-Nasa’I. 

50. Al-Nasa’I, al-TahawI, Abu Sa‘ld bin al-‘Arabl in al-Mn'jam (79/2) 
with a sahib sanad. Ibn al-Qayyim gave its source as Muhammad bin 
Ishaq al-Siraj in Jala al-Afhdm (pp. 14-15) and then declared it sahib. 
This wording includes both ‘Ibrahim’ and ‘the family of Ibrahim,’ 
something overlooked by both Ibn al-Qayyim and his teacher Ibn 
Taymiyyah, as explained above. 

51. Abu Dawud and Ahmad with a sahib isnad. 


The First Tashahhud 


158 


5 2. A famous grammarian and scholar of the Arabic language of the sec¬ 
ond century ah. 

53. Preserved in the Zahiriyyah Library in Damascus. 

54. Al-Nasa’I, Ahmad, and al-Tabaranl with various isnads from Ibn Mas- 
‘ud did . Details are given in Silsilah al—Aipadith al-Sahihah ($878). 
There is also the supporting hadith of Ibn al-Zubayr, found in Ma- 
jma‘ al-Zawa’id (2/142). 

55. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

56. Abu Ya‘la in his Musnad (284/2) with a good isnad. It is given in 
Silsilab al-Ahadith al-Sahihah (#604). 

57. Al-Bukharl and Abu Dawud. 

58. Ibid. 

59. Abu ‘Awanah and al-Nasa’I with a sahih sanad. 

60. literally, “as one who kneads dough.” 

61. Al-Harbl in Gharib al-Hadith\ its meaning is found in al-Bukharl and 
Abu Dawud. As for the hadith, “he forbade that a man should support 
himself with his hand when getting up during prayer,” it is munkar 
and not authentic, as I have explained in Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Da‘ifah 

(#967)- 

62. Arabic Qunut: carries several meanings, e.g. humility, devotion. In 
this context, it refers to the special supplication while standing during 
prayer. 



The First Tashahhud 


159 


63. Al-Bukhari and Ahmad. 

64. Ibid. 

65. Ahmad and al-Tabaranl with a sahih sanad. To raise the hands in 
qunitf is the madhhab of Imam Ahmad and also Ishaq bin Rahawayh. 
See al-MarwazI’s Masd ’il (p. 2 3). As for wiping the face with the hands, 
it is not reported in this position, and is thus an innovation; as for 
outside of prayer, it is not authentically reported. All that has been 
transmitted in this regard is either weak or very weak, as I have shown 
in DaifAbi Ddwiid (#262) and Silsilah al-Ahddith al-Sahihah (#597). 
This is why al-‘Izz bin ‘Abd al-Salam said in one of his fatwas, “Only 
an ignorant person does it.” See Appendix H. 

66 . Abu Dawud and al-Siraj; Al-Hakim declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl 
and others concurred. 

67. Abu Dawud, al-Siraj, and al-Daraqutnl with two hasan sanads. 

68. Ibn Khuzaymah in his sahih (1/78/2) and al-Khatlb in Kitdb al-Qunut 
with a sahih sanad. 

69. Al-Bukhari and Ahmad; the addition is in Muslim. 

70. Al-Nasa’I, Ahmad, al-Siraj (i09/i),andAbuYa‘lainhisAft«w<?z/with 
a good sanad. 

71. Ibn Nasr and al-Daraqutnl with a sahih sanad. 

72. We have said, .sometimes” because the Companions who narrated 
the Witr prayer did not mention the qunut in it, whereas had the 



The First Tashahhud 


160 


Prophet IfJ done so always, they would have all mentioned it. How¬ 
ever, Ubayy bin Ka‘b alone narrated the qumit in Witr, so this shows 
that he used to do it sometimes. Hence, this is evidence that qiiniit 
in Witr is not obligatory ( wdjib ), and this is the opinion of the ma¬ 
jority of scholars. For this reason, the researching Hanafl scholar, Ibn 
al-Humam, recognized in Fath al-Qadir (1/306, 359, 360) that the 
view of it being obligatory is feeble and not substantiated by evidence. 
This shows his fairness and lack of party-spirit, for this view which he 
has supported is contrary to his madhhab\ 

73. Ibn Abi Shaybah (12/41/1), Abu Dawud, al-Nasa I in Sunan al-Knbrd’ 
(218/1-2), Ibn ‘Asakir (4/244/2), Ahmad, al-Tabaranl, and al-Bayha- 
ql narrated this, along with the supplication after it, with a sahih sanad. 
Ibn Mandah narrated the supplication only in Tawhid (70/2) with a 
different, hasan sanad. Its takhrij is also given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#426). 

74. Ibn Khuzaymah (1/119/2) and also Ibn Abi Shaybah etc. as for the 
previous hadith. 

Note: Al-Nasa’I adds at the end of the qunut-. wa sall-Alldbn ‘aid al- 
Nahiyy al-Ummiyy (“may Allah send prayers on the Unlettered Pro¬ 
phet”), related with a weak isnad\ among those who declared it daif 
are Ibn Hajar al-‘AsqalanI and al-Zurqanl. Therefore, we have not in¬ 
cluded it in our system of combining acceptable narrations. Al-Tzz 
bin ‘Abd al-Salam said in al-Fatdwd (66/1, 1962), “To send prayers 
on the Messenger of Allah gfi in qumit is not authentic, nor is it fitting 
to add to the Messenger of Allah’s prayer in any way.” This view of 
his shows that he did not widen the argument by including the idea 
of bid‘ah hasanah (good innovation), as some of the later scholars are 
prone to doing! 


The First Tashahhud 


161 

However, it is proved in the hadith about Ubayy bin Ka‘b leading 
the people during the Ramadan night prayers that he used to send 
prayers on the Prophet |j§ at the end of the qumit, and that was during 
the reign of‘Umar i%,—transmitted by Ibn Khuzaymah in his Sahih 
(1097). Similarly is proved from Abu Hallmah Mu'adh al-Ansarl, who 
also used to lead them during ‘Umar’s rule—transmitted by Is- 

mall al-Qadl (#107) and others, so this addition is justified by the 
practice of the Salaf, and it is thus not fitting to categorically state that 
this addition is an innovation. Allah knows best. 



Chapter Ten 


The Last Tashahhud 


Contents 

io. i The obligation of this tashahhud 162, 

10.2 The obligation of sending prayers on the Prophet || 
in this tashahhud 163 

10.3 The obligation to seek refuge from four things before 
supplicating 163 

10.4 Supplication before taslim and its various types 164 
Endnotes 169 


10. i The obligation of this tashahhud 

Next, after completing the fourth rak‘ab, he |§ would sit for the last tasbah- 
bud. He If! would instruct regarding it, and do in it, just as he did in the 
first tashabbud, except that he would sit mutawarrikan, 1 with his left upper 
thigh on the ground, and both his feet protruding from one (i.e. the right) 
side. 2 He J§3 would have his left foot under his (right) thigh and shin, 3 his 
right foot upright 4 or occasionally he §§| would lay it along the ground. 5 His 
left palm would cover his (left) knee, leaning heavily on it. 6 


162 




The Last Tashahhttd 


163 


He set the example of sending prayers on him |§| in this tashahhud, as 
in the first tashahhud-, the ways of sending prayer on him narrated have 
been given in that section. 

10.2, The obligation of sending prayers on the Prophet HI 
in this tashahhud 

Once, he i§ heard a man supplicating in his prayer without glorifying the 
majesty of Allah Exalted, nor sending prayers on the Prophet ij|, so he said: 
“This man has been hasty.” He then called him and said to him and oth¬ 
ers, “When one of you prays, he should begin with the praise of his Lord, 
Almighty and Sublime, and his exaltation, and then send prayers (in one 
narration: he should send prayers) on the Prophet, and then supplicate as he 
wishes.” 7 

Also, he |§J heard a man glorifying and praising Allah, and sending prayers 
on the Prophet i§ in prayer, so the Messenger of Allah |j§ said to him: “Sup¬ 
plicate, and you will be answered; ask, and you will be given.” 8 


10.3 The obligation to seek refuge from four things before 
supplicating 

He | used to say, “When one of you has finished the [last] tashahhud, he 
should seek refuge with Allah from four things; saying: 

t i_j1 Ac- cjIAc- y* 

‘O Allah! I truly seek refuge with You from the punishment of Hellfire, 
and from the punishment of the grave, and from the trials of living and dying, 


The Last Tashahhttd 


164 


and from the evil [trials] of the False Christ.’ [Then he should supplicate for 
himself with what occurs to him.]” 9 —He ; would supplicate with it in his 
own tosh ah hud . 10 

Also, he used to teach the Companions this the way he taught 
them sfirahs of the Quran . 11 


10.4 Supplication before taslim and its various types 


He ifs used to use different supplications in his prayer , 12 supplicating with 
different ones at different times; he also endorsed other supplications, and 
ordered the worshiper to select of them what he wishes . 13 They are: 




“O Allah! Truly I seek refuge with You from the punishment of the 
grave, and I seek refuge with you from the trials of the False Christ, 
and I seek refuge with You from the trials of living and dying. O Allah! 
Truly I seek refuge with You from sin 14 and burden .” 15,16 


.[.Xx_>] J \_a jSj toA-s-c. Q ^*4-^ 


“O Allah! Truly I seek refuge with You from the evil of what I have 
done, and from the evil of what I have not done 17 [yet ].” 18 


3 - 




O Allah! Call me to account with an easy reckoning .” 19 


The Last Tashahhttd 


165 


4 - 



“O Allah! [I ask you], by Your knowledge of the Unseen, and Your 
control over the creation: give me life as long as You know that life is 
best for me, and take me when death is best for me. O Allah! I also ask 
of You fear of You, in secret and in open; I ask of You the word of Truth 
(in one narration: Wisdom) and justice in anger and in pleasure; I ask 
of You moderation in poverty and affluence; I ask of You joy which 
does not fade; I ask of You pleasure [which does not pass away, nor 
that] which ceases; I ask of You contentment with Your decree; I ask 
of You coolness of life after death; I ask of You the delight of looking 
towards Your Face; and [I ask of You] eagerness towards meeting You, 
not in harmful adversity, nor in misleading afflictions. O Allah! Adorn 
us with the decoration of Imdn, and make us those who guide and are 
guided.” 20 

5. He Up taught Abu Bakr al-Siddlq to say: 



0jjaJua 


“O Allah! Indeed I have wronged myself greatly, and none can forgive 
sins except You, so forgive me out of Your forgiveness, and have mercy 


The Last Tashahhttd 


166 


on me. Truly, You are the Oft-Forgiving, the Most Merciful.” 21 


6. He 1 instructed ‘A’ishah to say: 

c^-Lc-1 l_® 1 o! - ^ 111 

cjAlfA j 1T b®^ ct'—Tjt' l_® 1 dt^ 

Jl^S ^j-a I 4 J) S—JjJ (ctdLA ( 3 j ( 3 ^) 

t 3 i : ^ 3 -J 3 j) 3Df®l^ df? c-j^S l_®^ tjUl 3 Aj 

^a dL iyilj dUjd^J dUlU U jU-[Jl] ^ (dULll 

L® ] : [f* 1 ■ <^dc. 4jll -t„^ d-t-^C- 4J_® d^l.<."..,i 1 l_® 

[,_|] 4id|d- Jik- jl _y>t d^ d. c -4-*^ 


“O Allah! Indeed I ask ofYou all Good, [the imminent and the far-off,] 
that of it which I know and that which I do not know. I seek refuge 
with You from all Evil, [the imminent and the far-off] that of it which 
I know and that which I do not know. I ask ofYou (in one narration: 
O Allah! Indeed I ask of You) the Garden, and whatever saying or 
deed which brings one near to it; I seek refuge with You from the Fire, 
and (from) whatever saying or deed which brings one near to it. I ask 
of You (in one narration: O Allah! Indeed I ask of You) [the] good 
of what was asked ofYou by Your slave and messenger [Muhammad; 
and I seek refuge with You from evil of what Your slave and messenger 
Muhammad |§| sought refuge with You], [I ask ofYou] that whatever 
You have decreed for me, its result [for me] be beneficial.” 22 


7. He sfj said to a man, “What do you say during the prayer?” He replied, 
“I bear witness (i.e. do the tashahhud), then I ask Allah for the Garden, 
and I seek refuge with Him from the Fire. However, by Allah, there is 


The Last Tashahhttd 


167 


no murmuring 23 as good as yours or that of Mu'adh.” So he i§ said, 
“Our murmuring is like yours.” 24 


He HP heard a man saying in his tashahhud : 

& J <si\ Ull ii-Ml (4k :Z\jj j j) iill t dUll! 

jjiDl c-ol dli} el J-f*-’ “U |Jj jJjj j 


“O Allah! Indeed I ask ofYou, O Allah (in one narration: by Allah), the 
One, the Only, the Absolute, Who begets not and nor is He begotten, 
and there is none like Him, that You forgive me my sins; indeed You 
are the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.” On this, he ; said, “He has 
been forgiven, he has been forgiven.” 25 


9. He 1 heard another man say in his tashahhud : 

U ^<7 U Tj li U cjI^LUI [U] 

.[jllll dL Sjdlj ^i-l] 

“O Allah! Indeed I ask of You by the fact that to You belongs all 
Praise; there is no (true) god except You, [You alone, You have no part¬ 
ners;] [the Bestower of Favors;] [O] Originator of the Heavens and 
the Earth; O One that is Full of Majesty and Honor; O Living One, 
O Eternal One; [Indeed I ask ofYou] [the Garden, and I seek refuge 
with You from the Fire].” [So the Prophet S§ said to his Companions, 
“Do you know with what he has supplicated?” They said, “Allah and 
His Messenger know best.” He |§J said, “By Him in Whose Hand is 
my soul, he has supplicated Allah with His Mighty (in one narration: 
Mightiest) name, 26 with which if He is supplicated, He answers, and 
with which if He is asked, He gives.”] 27 


diOHdu'di 
[dllld! jl] pis 


.juil du ol difldf pJl 


The Last Tashahhttd 


168 


One of the last things he would say between the tasbahhad and the 
tasllm would be: 


tCt-jLbC-l b®^ '-b®^J b®^J b® ^^111 

.cif i\ S! <>>ii cif«J® a® j&f di uj 

“O Allah! Forgive me what I have done in the past; and what I will do 
in the future; and what I have concealed and what I have done openly; 
and what I have exceeded in; and whatever You know about more 
know than I. You are the Bringer-Forward and You are the Delayer; 
there is no (true) god except You.” 28 


Endnotes 


1. Al-Bukharl. 

2. Ibid. As for two rak‘ab prayers such as Fajr, the Sunnah is to sit muf- 
tarisban. This difference in detail is documented from Imam Ahmad, 
see Ibn HanI’s Masd’ilal-Imam Ahmad (p. 79). 

3. Abu Dawud and al-Bayhaql with a sahib sanad. 

4. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

5. Ibid. 

6. Ibid. 

7. Ahmad, Abu Dawud, Ibn Khuzaymah (1/83/2), and al-Hakim who 
declared it sahib and al-Dhahabl concurred. 

It should be known that this hadith proves that saldb (sending prayers) 
on the Prophet jb in this tasbahhad is obligatory, due to the com¬ 
mand about it. This opinion was taken by Imam al-Shafi‘I and by 
Imam Ahmad in the later of the two narrations from him, and before 
them by several Companions, as well as other people of knowledge. 
Because of this, al-Ajurrl said in al-Shariah (p. 415): “He who does 


169 


The Last Tashahhttd 


170 

not send prayers on the Prophet £§? in the final tashahhud must repeat 
the prayer.” Hence, those who label Imam al-Shafi‘1 as being alone and 
odd in his opinion on this, are not being just, as the faqlh al-Haythaml 
has explained in al-Darr al-Mandiid (§§ 13-16). 

8. Al-Nasa’I with a sahih sanad. 

9. Muslim, Abu Awanah, al-Nasa’I, and Ibn al-Jarud in al-Muntaqd (27). 
It is given in Irwd al-Ghalil (#350). 

1 o. Abu Dawud and Ahmad with a sahih sanad. 

11. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 

12. We have not said, “...in his tashahhud” because the text is “...in 
his prayer,” not specifying either tashahhud or anything else. Hence, 
it covers all positions suitable for supplication, e.g. prostration and 
tashahhud ; the instruction to supplicate in these two postures has been 
mentioned. 

13. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. Al-Athram asked Imam Ahmad: “With what 
(words) should I supplicate after tashahhudV He replied, “As has 
been narrated.” Al-Athram said, “Didn’t the Messenger of Allah §j§ 
say, ‘Then he should select whichever supplication he likes’?” Imam 
Ahmad said, “He should select out of what has been narrated.” Al- 
Athram repeated the question to which Imam Ahmad replied, “From 
what has been narrated.” This was quoted by Ibn Taymlyyah ( Majmu ‘ 
al-Fatdwd 69/218/1), who endorsed it, adding, “Hence, ‘whichever 
supplication’ refers to the supplications which Allah loves, not to any 
supplication...;” later he said, “Hence, it is best to say: (one should 


The Last Tashahhad 


171 

supplicate) with the approved, established supplications, and these are 
what have been narrated and those that are beneficial.” This is so, but 
to recognize which supplications are indeed beneficial depends on au¬ 
thentic knowledge, and this is rarely found among the people, so it is 
best to stick to the supplications quoted, especially when they include 
what the worshiper wishes to request. Allah knows best. 

14. Arabic al-Ma’tham\ what causes a man to sin, or the sin itself. 

15. Arabic al-Maghram\ burden; here it means debt, as proved by the rest 
of the hadith, in which ‘A’ishah 11ft, said, “Someone said to him, ‘Why 
do you seek refuge from maghram, so often, O Messenger of Allah?’ 
He replied, ‘Truly, when a man becomes indebted, he speaks and lies, 
and he promises and breaks his promise.’ ” 

16. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

17. i.e. from the evil of the bad actions I have done, and from the evil of 
not doing good actions. 

18. Al-Nasa’i with a sahih sanad and Ibn Abi ‘Asim in his al-Sunnah 
(#370—with my checking); the addition is from the latter. 

19. Ahmad and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl agreed. 

20. Al-Nasa’i and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl con¬ 
curred. 

21. Al-Bukharl and Muslim. 



The Last Tashahhud 


172 


22. Ahmad, al-TayallsI, al-Bukharl in al-Adab al-Mufrad, Ibn Majah, and 
al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabi concurred. I have 
given its takhrij in Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah (#1542). 

23. Arabic dandanah\ to speak such that the intonation is audible, but the 
words are incomprehensible—in this case, the quiet words of suppli¬ 
cation. The final statement means, “Our words are like yours.” 

24. Abu Dawud, Ibn Majah, and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/87/1) with a sahih 
isnad. 

25. Abu Dawud, al-Nasa’I, Ahmad, and Ibn Khuzaymah; Al-Hakim de¬ 
clared it sahih and al-Dhahabi concurred. 

26. This is tawassid (a seeking of approach) to Allah through His most 
beautiful names and attributes, and this is what Allah The Exalted 
commands: «To Allah belong the most beautiful names, so call on 
Him by them.» (Quran, 7:180). As for seeking to approach Allah 
through other things, e.g. for so-and-so’s sake, or by so-and-so’s right, 
status, dignity, etc. there is text from Iaam Abu Hanlfah and his com¬ 
panions that such a practice is at least disliked ( makruh)', in general it 
is prohibited ( hardm ). Therefore, it is a pity that one sees most of the 
people, among them many shaykhs, totally neglecting the approved 
tawassid —you will never hear them approaching Allah this way—but 
they are well-versed in innovated forms of tawassid, which are at the 
very least debatable, as though no other way is allowed! Shaykh al- 
Islam Ibn Taymlyyah has composed an extremely good essay on this 
subject entitled al- Tawassul wa al- Wasilah (Approaching Allah, and the 
Means of doing so), which should be consulted, for it is very impor¬ 
tant, and there is little to compare with it in its coverage. There is also 



The Last Tashahhud 


i 73 


my article al-Tawassul—Its types and its ridings, which is also important 
in its subject matter and format, and also refutes some of the latest 
misconceptions advanced by contemporary doctors of religion. May 
Allah guide us and them. 

27. Abu Dawud, al-Nasa’I, Ahmad, al-Bukharl in al-Adab al-Mufrad, al- 
Tabaranl, and Ibn Mandah in Tawhid (44/2, 67/1, 70/1-2) with sahih 
isnads. 

28. Muslim and Abu ‘Awanah. 



Chapter Eleven 


The Tasllm 


Next, he ifs would salute to his right: 

“Peace and Allah’s Mercy be on you [such that the whiteness of his right 
cheek was visible],” and on his left: 

“Peace and Allah’s Mercy be on you [such that the whiteness of his left 
cheek was visible].” 1 Sometimes, he | added to the greeting on the right: 

. .and His blessings (be on you).” 2 When he said: 

.<uii 

“Peace and Allah’s Mercy be on you” to his right, he would sometimes 
shorten the greeting on his left to: 

. r £=4i 

“Peace be on you.” 3 Sometimes, he Sfe would salute once only, 

“Peace be on you,” [in front of his face, turning to his right side a bit (or 
a little)]. 4 

They used to gesture with their hands when saluting to the right and 
left; when the Messenger of Allah saw them, he said, “What is the matter 
with you, gesturing with your hands as if they are the tails of wild horses?! 


174 


The Taslim 


i 75 


When one of you salutes, he should look towards his companion and not 
indicate with his hand.” [So when they prayed with him, they did not ges¬ 
ture.] (In one narration: “It is enough for each of you to place his hand on 
his thigh, and then salute his brothers who are on his right and left.”) 5 


11.1 The obligation of the taslim 


He used to say, “.. .it (the prayer) is exited by the taslim,” 6 

This is the last of what has been possible to compile regarding the descrip¬ 
tion of the Prophet’s prayer > from the takblr to the taslim-. I hope that 
Allah will make it sincerely for His Face, Full of Honor, and a guide to the 
Sunnah of His kind and merciful Prophet. 








Glorified be Allah, and Praised. Glorified be You, O Allah, and Praised. 
I bear witness that there is no true god except You. I seek forgiveness from 
You and repent to You. 


blS" JT J&3 ‘A-^- jp j c-cli- Jl J c-j Jc. 

.U. ii^iLjbipijT',.1 


O Allah! Send prayers on Muhammad, and on the family of Muhammad, 
and send blessings on Muhammad, and on the family of Muhammad, as You 
sent prayers on Ibrahim and the family of Ibrahim; You are indeed Worthy 
of Praise, Full of Glory. 7 


Endnotes 

1. Abu Dawud, al-Nasa’I, and al-Tirmidhl who declared it sahib. 

2. Abu Dawud and Ibn Khuzaymah (1/87/2) with a sahih sanad. ‘Abd 
al-Haqq also declared it sahih in his Ahkdm (56/2), as did al-NawawI 
and Ibn Hajar. It was also transmitted via another route by ‘Abd al- 
Razzaq in his Musannaf (2/219), Abu Ya‘la in his Musnad (3/1253), 
al-Daraqutnl, and al-Tabaranl in Midjam al-Kabir {^I6jld) and Mid- 
jam al-Awsat (#4476—my numbering). 

3. Al-Nasa’I, Ahmad, and al-Siraj with a sahih sanad. 

4. Ibn Khuzaymah, al-Bayhaql, al-Diya in al-Mukhtdrah, and ‘Abd al- 
Ghanl al-MaqdisI in his Sunan (243/1) with a sahih isnad\ Ahmad, 
al-Tabaranl in Midjam al-Awsat (32/2), al-Bayhaql, Ibn al-Mulaqqln 
(29/1), and al-Hakim who declared it sahih and al-Dhahabl concurred. 
Its takhrij is given in Irwd al-Ghalil under hadith #327. 

5. Muslim, Abu ‘Awanah, al-Siraj, Ibn Khuzaymah, and al-Tabaranl. 

Note: The Tbachyyah have distorted this hadith. Their scholar Rabl‘ 
has related it in his unreliable Musnad with a different wording to 
justify their view that raising the hands with takbir invalidates the 


176 



The Taslim 


171 


prayer! That wording is false, as I have explained in Silsilah al-Ahadith 
al-Daifah (#6044). 

6. Al-Hakim and al-Dhahabl declared it sahib, it has already been given 
in full under the Opening Takbir. 

7. The first supplication is the fullest form of the dn ‘a known as kajfdrah 
al-majlis (expiation of the gathering); “he who says it in a gathering of 
Remembrance (of Allah), it will be like a seal to stamp it with, and he 
who says it in a gathering of vain talk, it will be an expiation for it”— 
authentically related by al-Hakim and al-Tabaranl. The second suppli¬ 
cation is, of course, from the Sunnah of sending peace and mercy on 
the Messenger. These two supplications are thus the best way of imple¬ 
menting the following Islamic guideline: “No people sit in a gathering 
in which they do not mention Allah, nor send prayers on the Prophet, 
without it being a source of regret for them; if Allah wishes, He will 
punish them, or if He wishes, he will forgive them”—authentically re¬ 
lated by al-Tirmidhl, al-Hakim, and Ahmad. See Shaykh al-Albanl’s 
Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Sahihah (74-81) for details. 



Appendix A 


Weakness of narrations endorsing ikhtilaf 

From: Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Da‘ifah wa al-Mawduah (#57-61, #438). 

Narration #57 

The disagreement among my Ummah is a mercy. 

Ld asla lahu (Baseless). The Mubaddithin have tried to find an isndd for 
it but have not found one, to the extent that al-Suyutl said in his al-Jdmi 
al-Saghir, “Perhaps it was collected in one of the books of the bujfdz which 
did not reach us”! 

This suggestion is very far-fetched, since it would mean that some of the 
sayings of the Prophet i have been lost to the Ummah forever, something 
which is not permissible for a Muslim to believe. 

Al-Manawl quoted al-Subkl as saying, “It (i.e. the saying) is unknown to 
the Mubaddithin and I cannot find any isndd for it, whether sahib, da ‘ if, or 
mawdu and this was endorsed by Shaykh Zakariyyah al-Ansarl in his notes 
on Tafsir al-Baydawi (92/2). 

Further, the meaning of this hadith is also incorrect as shown by the ver¬ 
ifying scholars, hence Ibn Hazm says in al-Ihkdm fi Usui al-Ahkdm (5/64) 
after indicating that it is not a hadith. 


178 



Weakness of narrations endorsing ikbtildf 


179 


This is one of the most incorrect sayings possible, since if ikh- 
tildf were a mercy, then agreement would be a punishment, 
something which no Muslim would say, because there can only 
be agreement or disagreement, and there can only be mercy or 
punishment. 


It contradicts the Quran, which condemns ikbtildf in many places. 

Narration #58 

My Companions are like the stars: whichever of them you follow, you 

will be rightly-guided. 

Mawdii ‘ (Fabricated) . Related by Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr in ]dmi ‘ Bay an al- Ilm 
(2/91) and Ibn Hazm in al-Ihkdm (6/82) via the route: 

Sallam bin Sulaym, who said, “Al-Harith bin Ghissln narrated to us from 
al-A‘mash from Abu Sufyan from Jabir from the Prophet |§J.” 

Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr said, “Proof cannot be established with this isnad be¬ 
cause al-Harith bin Ghissln is majhiil (unknown);” Ibn Hazm said, “This is 
a fallen narration. Abu Sufyan is weak; al-Harith bin Ghissln is Abu Wahb 
al-Thaqafl; Sallam bin Sulayman narrated fabricated abadith —this is one of 
them without a doubt.” 

To judge this baditb on Sallam bin Sulaym—also known as Sallam bin 
Sulayman—is better, for he is agreed to be daif\ in fact, Ibn Khirash said 
about him, “An utter liar,” and Ibn Hibban said, “He narrated fabricated 
abadith .” 

As for Abu Sufyan, he is not weak as Ibn Hazm said, but rather he is 
reliable as Ibn Hajar has said in al-Taqrib, and Muslim narrates from him in 
his Sahib. 



Weakness of narrations endorsing ikbtildf 18 o 

Al-Harith bin Ghissln is unknown as Ibn Hazm said, as did Ibn ‘Abd al- 
Barr, even though Ibn Hibban does mention him in aTThiqdt (The Reliable 
Narrators). 

Hence, Imam Ahmad said, “This hadith is not authentic,” as quoted in 
al-Muntakhab (10/199/2) of Ibn Qudamah. 

As for the saying of al-Sha‘ranI in al-Mizdn (1/28), “This hadith, although 
debatable in the eyes of the Muhaddithin, is nevertheless authentic in the eyes 
of the people of Kashf ” it is completely false and whimsical, and is not to 
be given any significance! This is because authenticating ahadith by way of 
Kashf (“unveiling,” while in a state of trance) is a wicked innovation of the 
Sufis, and depending upon it leads to the authentication of false, baseless 
ahadith such as this one. This is because, even at the best of times, Kashf is 
like opinion, which is sometimes correct and sometimes wrong—and that is 
if no personal desires enter into it! We ask Allah to save us from it and from 
everything He is not pleased with. 

Narration #43 8 

The example of my Companions is that of the stars: he who follows 

any of them will be rightly-guided. 

Mawdid (Fabricated). Related by al-Quda‘1 (109/2) via: 

Ja‘far bin ‘Abd al-Wahid, who said, “Wahb bin Jarir bin Hazim informed 
us from his father from al-A‘mash from Abu Salih from Abu Hurayrah 
from The Prophet A.” 

One of the Muhaddithin, either Ibn al-Muhibb or al-Dhahabl, wrote in 
the margin, “This hadith is not at all authentic,” i.e. it is fabricated: the flaw 
in it is Ja‘far here, about whom al-Daraqutnl said, “He used to fabricate 
ahadith!’ Abu Zuflah said, “He narrated baseless ahadith-,” Al-Dhahabl gave 



Weakness of narrations endorsing ikbtildf 


181 


some hadith because of which he disparaged him, among them being this 
one, and then said, “This is one of his calamities!” 

Narration #59 

Whatever you are given from the Book of Allah is to be acted upon; 
there is no excuse for anyone to leave it. If it is not in the Book of 
Allah, then (act upon) a previous example ( sunnak ) of mine. If there 
is no previous example ( snnnab ) of mine, then (act upon) what my 
Companions say; Verily, my Companions are of the station of the stars 
in the sky, so whichever of them you take, you will be guided, and the 
disagreement of my Companions is a mercy for you. 

Mawdu (Fabricated). Collected by al-Khatlb in al-Kifdyab fi ‘Ilm al- 
Riwdyab (p. 48) and also by Abu al-‘Abbas al-Asam in his Hadith (#142), 
and Ibn ‘Asakir (7/315/2) by way of: 

Sulayman ibn Abl Karlmah from Juwaybir from al-Dahhak from Ibn ‘Ab¬ 
bas i§| from The Prophet I;. 

This isnad is da'ifjiddan (very weak). 

About Sulayman ibn Abl Karlmah, Ibn Abi Hatim (2/1/138) reported 
from his father about him, “He is weak in hadith .” 

Juwaybir is Ibn Sa‘ld al-Azadl, and is matriik (abandoned) as al-Daraqutnl, 
al-Nasa’I, and others have said, and Ibn al-Madlnl declared him to be very 
weak. 

Al-Dahhak is Ibn Muzahim al-Hilall, and he did not meet Ibn ‘Abbas 
t!$§|. Al-BayhaqI said, “There is a problem; although the text of this hadith is 
well-known — its various chains are weak; it is not established through this 
chain.” 

Al-TraqI quoted the last part of the hadith in his Takhrij Ihyd ‘Uliim al-Din 
(1/25) O and then (al-‘lraql) said, “Its isnad is da‘if ” 



Weakness of narrations endorsing ikbtildf 


182 


Al-SuyutI quoted the hadith in its entirety at the beginning of his treatise 
Jazil al-Mawdhib fi Ikbtildf al-Madhahib from the narration of al-Bayhaqi 
in al-Madkbal, and al-Daylaml related it from this route, as occurs in al- 
Mawdiiat of‘All al-Qarl (p. 19). O The isndd is actually very weak due to 
what we have mentioned about Juwaybir, as al-SakhawI said in al-Maqdsid. 
In meaning, however, the hadith is fabricated, as is clear from what has pre¬ 
ceded and what will follow. Once you know this, then the saying of al-SuyutI 
in his aforementioned treatise is very strange: “...and this hadith contains 
several points to note; among them his HJ informing of the disagreements 
between the madhahib in non-fundamental matters, and that is one of his 
miracles, since it is information about the Unseen; also, his being pleased 
with that and approving of it, since he described it as a mercy, and that the 
burdened person may choose whichever of them he wishes.” 

It could be said to him, “first establish the throne, and then sit.” What he 
has mentioned about the choice is false. It is not possible for the Muslim to 
cling to it and act upon its generality, since it leads to breaking away from 
the restrictions of the Sharfah, as is not hard to see. 

Narration #60 

I asked my Lord about that which my Companions would disagree 
about after me, so Allah inspired me: “O Muhammad! Your Compan¬ 
ions are to Me like the station of the stars in the sky—some are brighter 
than others; so whoever takes from any of them in those matters where 
they have differed, then to Me, he is upon guidance.” 

Mawdu (Fabricated). Reported by Ibn Battah in al-Ibdnah (4/11/2), 
al-Khatlb, Nizam al-Malik in al-Amdli (13/2), al-Daylaml in his Mnsnad 
(2/190), al-Diya in al-Mnntaqd ‘an Masmudtihi bi Marti (116/2), and Ibn 
‘Asakir (6/303/1) by way of: Nu'aym bin Hammad, who said, “Abd al- 



Weakness of narrations endorsing ikbtildf 


183 


Rahim bin Zayd al-‘AmmI narrated to us from his father from Sa‘ld bin 
al-Musayyib from ‘Umar bin al-Khattab from the Prophet Iff}.” 

This isnad is mawdid. 

Nu‘aym bin Hammad is weak; Ibn Hajar said, “He makes many mis¬ 
takes.” 

About ‘Abd al-Rahlm bin Zayd al-‘AmmI, al-Bukharl said, “He was aban¬ 
doned;” Abu Hatim said, “His ahadith are abandoned; he is unacceptable in 
hadith —he used to undermine his father by narrating disasters from him;” 
Ibn Main said, “He was an utter, filthy liar.” 

About his father, Zayd al-‘AmmI bin al-Hawarl, Ibn Sa‘d said, “He was 
weak in hadith .” 

Al-SuyutI recorded this hadith in al-Jdmi‘al-Saghir through the narration 
of al-SijizzI in al-Ihdnah and Ibn ‘Asakir from ‘Umar 4 I&; al-ManawI said in 
his commentary on al-]dmi al-Saghir. 

Ibn al-jawzl said in al-‘Ilal, “This is not authentic. Nu‘aym has 
been disparaged; Ibn Ma‘In has described ‘Abd al-Rahlm as an 
utter liar; it says in al-Mizdn\ This hadith is false.” 

Narration #61 

Verily, my Companions are like the stars: so if you accept any of their 

sayings, you will be guided. 

Mawdtd (Fabricated). Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr reports it in muallaq (suspended, 
i.e. an incomplete chain of narrators at the collectors end) form and Ibn 
Hazm reports it from him; the complete chain was provided by ‘Abd bin 
Humayd in al-Mnntakhab min al-Mnsnad (86/1): 



Weakness of narrations endorsing ikbtildf 


184 


Ahmad bin Yunus informed me: Abu Shihab al-Hannat nar¬ 
rated to us, from Hamzah al-Jazrl, from Nafi‘, from Ibn ‘Umar 
Sfi from the Prophet |g. 

Also, Ibn Battah narrated it in al-Ibdnab (4/11/2) by another chain from 
Abu Shihab. 

Ibn ‘Abd al-Barr said, “This isnad is not authentic; no one acceptable as 
proof has reported it from Nafi‘.” 

This Hamzah is Ibn Abi Hamzah; al-Daraqutnl said about him, “ Matruk 
(abandoned);” Ibn ‘Adi said, “His narrations are mostly fabricated;” Ibn Hib- 
ban said, “He would be alone in narrating things which are fabricated from 
reliable narrators, to such an extent that it is as if he did so deliberately— 
it is not permissible to narrate from him;” al-Dhahabl quoted some of his 
fabricated ahadith in al-Mizdn, this being one of them. 

Ibn Hazm said in al-Ihkdm (61 83) \textcolorMaroon—after declaring that 
this baditb (#2, with all its versions) is undoubtedly a lie since it also contra¬ 
dicts many dydt of the Quran, e.g. al-Najm (53:3-4), al-Nisd (4:82), al-Anfdl 
(8:46)—the following: 

...therefore, it is absurd that the Messenger would com¬ 
mand us to follow every view expressed by the Companions, 
may Allah be pleased with them all, for there were among them 
those who permitted something while others prohibited it. If 
the above were the case, trading in intoxicants would be per¬ 
missible if one followed Samurah bin Jundub; it would be per¬ 
missible for someone fasting to eat snow if one followed Abu 
Talhah, but prohibited by following others beside him; to not 
take a bath due to incomplete intercourse would be obligatory 
if one followed ‘All, ‘Uthman, Talhah, Abu Ayytib, and Ubayy 


Weakness of narrations endorsing ikbtildf 


185 


bin Ka‘b, but prohibited if one followed ‘A’ishah and Ibn ‘U- 
mar; all these examples have been related to us with authentic 
chains of narration. 

He then went on to explain at length some opinions expressed by Com¬ 
panions in which they were wrong about the Sunnah, both during the life¬ 
time of the Prophet i§* and after his death. He then said (6/86), 

So how can it be allowable to blindly follow the opinions of 
people who make mistakes as well as get it right?! 

Before this, he explained under the heading Differing Condemned (5/64), 
the error of those who say, “Disagreement is a mercy,” using as evidence the 
narration, “My Companions are like the stars: whichever of them you follow, 
you will be rightly-guided,” by clarifying that the narration is a lie for several 
reasons: 

i. It is not authentic with regard to its chain of narration. 

ii. The Prophet could not have commanded us to follow something 
which he himself had declared erroneous at times; e.g. he pointed 
out Abu Bakr’s ift, mistake in interpreting a dream, ‘Umar’s error 
in another interpretation, and Abu al-Sanabil’s ift, going wrong in a 
verdict he gave. Hence, it is not possible for him f to order us to 
follow someone mistaken. 

iii. The Prophet never spoke falsehood; his words were always truth. 
The comparison with the stars is clearly flawed, since for example, if 
someone intends to travel a certain route directed by the stars in the 
constellation of Capricorn, but instead follows the stars in Cancer, he 


Weakness of narrations endorsing ikhtildf 


186 


will not be correctly-guided, but will stray far away from the correct 
path and err tremendously; therefore, it is obviously false to say that 
following any star will guide one correctly. 

Ibn al-Mulaqqin gave a summarized version of Ibn Hazm’s words in his al- 
Kbuldsah (ihyf, endorsed it and ended his discussion of the hadith saying: 
Ibn Hazm said,“This is an invented, fabricated, false narration, not correct 
at all.” 



Appendix B 


The authentic narration: “You are right in 
some of it and wrong in some of it. ” 


From: Sahih al-Bukhdri , Book of Dreams, English translation of the mean¬ 
ings by Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan. 

Narrated Ibn ‘Abbas ifi: 

A man came to Allah’s Messenger and said, “ I saw in a dream, 
a cloud having shade. Butter and honey were dropping from it 
and I saw the people gathering it in their hands, some gath¬ 
ering much and some little. And behold, there was a rope ex¬ 
tending from the earth to the sky, and I saw that you held it 
and went up; then, another man held it and went up and (af¬ 
ter that) another (third) man held it and went up, and then 
another (fourth) man held it, but it broke and then got con¬ 
nected again.” Abu Bakr said, “O Allah’s Messenger! Let 
my father be sacrificed for you! By Allah, allow me to interpret 
this dream.” The Prophet said to him, “Interpret it”. Abu 
Bakr i%, said, “The cloud with shade symbolizes Islam, and 
the butter and the honey dropping from it symbolizes the Qu¬ 
ran, its sweetness and some people learning much of the Quran 
while some a little. The rope which is extended from the sky to 


187 


“You are right in some of it and wrong in some of it. ” 18 8 

the earth is the Truth which you (the Prophet |§) are follow¬ 
ing. You follow it and Allah will raise you high with it, and 
then another person will follow it and will rise up with it and 
then another man will follow it but it will break and then it 
will be connected for him and he will rise up with it. O Allah’s 
Messenger! Let my father be sacrificed for you! Am I right or 
wrong?” The Prophet replied, “You are right in some of 
it and wrong in some of it.” Abu Bakr 4 % said, “O Allah’s 
Prophet! By Allah, you must tell me in what I was wrong.” The 
Prophet |§ said, “Do not swear.” 

Reported by al-Bukhari and Muslim. 


Appendix C 


The one who prayed badly 

In hadith and fiqh literature, this term refers to the Companion mentioned in 
the following hadith of Sahib al-Bukhdri (Book of Prayer, English translation 
by Dr. Muhammad Muhsin Khan); many other narrations of this incident 
are found in the various collections of hadith, and provide an important 
source of instructions from the Prophet ■; regarding the correct way to pray. 

Narrated Abu Hurayrah 

The Messenger of Allah entered the mosque and a person 
followed him. The man prayed and then went to the Prophet 
i§ and greeted him; he !j§ returned the greeting and said (to 
him), “Go BACK AND PRAY, FOR YOU HAVE NOT PRAYED.” The 
man went back and prayed in the same way as before, and then 
returned and greeted the Prophet (§, who said, “Go back and 
pray, for you have not prayed,” three times. The man said, 

“By Him Who sent you with the Truth, I cannot do so any 
better than this, so please teach me.” He . said, “When you 
stand for the prayer, say takbir and then recite what is easy for 
you from the Quran (from what you know by heart); then bow 
until you feel at ease in ruku ‘; then raise your head and stand 
up straight, then prostrate until you feel at ease in sajdab, then 


189 


The one who prayed badly 


190 


sit with calmness until you feel at ease, and do likewise in all 
your prayers.” 

Other narrations of this hadith found in books such as SimanAbi Dawiid, 
contain more details. 



Appendix D 


Weakness of the narration about placing the 
hands below the navel 

From Irwd al-Ghalil (#353) and Ahkdm al-Jand’iz (p. 118, al-Maktab Islam!, 
1986), both by Shaykh al-Albanl. 

Imam Ahmad bin Hanbal in his son, ‘Abd Allah’s Masd’il (62/2) and also 
in Zawa’id al-Musnad (1/110), Abu Dawud (756), al-Daraqutnl (107), al- 
Bayhaqi (2/310), and Ibn Abl Shaybah (1/156/1) reported: 

An ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Ishaq 'an Ziyad bin Zayd al-Siwa I ‘an Abu Juhay- 
fah ‘an ‘All who said, “It is from the Sunnah during the prayer to place 
one palm on the other, below the navel.” 

This is a da if (weak) sanad due to ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Ishaq (al-Wasitl 
al-Kufl), who is weak (see below). On top of that, it has idtarab (shakiness) 
in it, for he has narrated it: 

i. Once ‘an Ziyad ‘an Abu Juhayfah ‘an ‘All (as above); 

ii. Once ‘an al-Nu‘man bin Sa‘d ‘an ‘All (reported by al-Daraqutnl and 
al-Bayhaql); and 

iii. Once ‘an Siyar Abu al-Hakam ‘an Abu Wa’il, who said, “Abu Hu- 
rayrah said, ‘It is from the Sunnah..(reported by Abu Dawud 
[758] and al-Daraqutnl). 



The narration about placing the hands below the navel 


192 


The Weakness of ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Ishaq al-Kufi in the 
eyes of the Imams of Hadith 

Abu Dawud said, “I heard Ahmad ibn Hanbal declaring ‘Abd al-Rahman 
bin Ishaq al-Kufi da if (weak).” This is why Imam Ahmad did not accept 
this hadith of his, for his son ‘Abd Allah said, “I saw that when praying, my 
father placed his hands, one on the other, above the navel.” 

Al-Nawawl said in al-Majmu (3/313), and also in Shark Sahih Muslim 
and elsewhere, “They (i.e. the scholars of hadith ) agree in declaring this 
hadith weak, because it is a narration of‘Abd al-Rahman bin Ishaq al-Wasitl, 
who is a da ‘if (weak) narrator, as agreed upon by the Imams of Jarh wa Ta ‘dil 
(Authentication and Disparagement [of reporters]).” 

Al-Zayla‘I said in Nasb al-Rdyah (1/314), “Al-BayhaqI said in al-Ma‘rifah\ 
‘Its isnad is not firm, for it is a unique narration of‘Abd al-Rahman bin Ishaq 
al-Wasitl, who is matriik (abandoned).’” 

Ibn Hajar said in Fath al-Bdri (2/186), “It is a weak hadithS 

What further points to its weakness is that contrary to it has been narrated 
on the authority of ‘All with a better isnad : the hadith of Ibn Jarir al- 
Dabbl ‘an his father, who said, “I saw ‘All holding his left arm with his 
right on the wrist, above the navel” —this isnad is a candidate for the rank of 
hasan\ Al-BayhaqI (if 01) firmly designated it to be hasan, and al-Bukharl 
(1/301) designated it with certainty, giving it in an abridged, ta‘liq form. 

What is authentic from the Prophet A with respect to the position of the 
hands is that they should be on the chest; there are many ahadith about this, 
among them is one on the authority of Tawus, who said, “The Messenger of 
Allah §§> used to place his right arm on his left arm, and clasp them firmly 
on his chest during prayer,”—transmitted by Abu Dawud (759) with a sahih 
isnad. Although this is mursal, it is enough as proof for all scholars, with all 


The narration about placing the hands below the navel 


193 


their various opinions regarding the mursal hadith, since it is sahih as a mursal 
isnad and has also been related as mawsid in many narrations; hence, it is 
valid as proof for all. Some of the supporting narrations are as follows: 

i. From Wail bin Hujr: “That he saw the Prophet put his right hand 
upon his left and place them upon his chest.” Reported by Ibn Khuza- 
ymah in his Sahih (Nash al-Rdyah, 1/314) and reported by al-Bayhaql 
in his Sunan (2/30) with two chains of narration which support each 
other. 

ii. From Qablsah bin Idulb, from his father who said: “I saw the Pro¬ 
phet leave after completing the prayer from his right and his left, 
and I saw him place this upon his chest—Yahya (Ibn SaTd) described 
the right (hand) upon the left above the joint.” Reported by Imam 
Ahmad (5/226) with a chain of narrators who are of the standard set 
by Muslim except for Qablsah, but he is declared reliable by al-Tjll 
and Ibn Hibban; however, no one narrates from him except Simak 
bin Harb about whom Ibn al-Madlnl and al-Nasa’I say: “Unknown,” 
and Ibn Hajar says in al-Taqrib\ “He is Maqbul, i.e. acceptable only 
if supported.” The hadith of one such as him are hasan as support¬ 
ing narrations, and therefore al-Tirmidhl said after quoting the part 
of this hadith concerning taking the left hand with the right, “It is a 
hasan hadith!’ 

So these are three ahadith which show that the Sunnah is to place the 
hands on the chest, and one who comes across them will not doubt that 
together they are sufficient to prove this. 


Appendix E 


Weakness of assorted narrations 

From: Silsilah at Ahadlth al-Da ‘ifah wa al-Mawdii ‘ah (# 568-570) by Shaykh 
al-Albanl. 

Narration #568 

He who raises his hands during the prayer, there is no prayer for him. 

Mawdit (Fabricated). Ibn Tahir said—after quoting it in Tadhkimb al- 
Mawdii ‘at (p. 87)—“The isnad contains Ma’mun bin Ahmad al-HarawI, an 
utter liar who used to fabricate ahadltht 

Al-DhahabI said about him, “He brought calamities and disgraceful re¬ 
ports. He invented ahadlth , this being one of them, and related them on the 
authority of reliable narrators.” 

Abu Nu'aym said in al-Lisdn, “He was a filthy liar who would narrate 
fabricated reports on the authority of trustworthy narrators.” 

It is clear to me from the ahadlth which Ma’mun al-HarawI has invented 
that he is a bigoted zealot of the Hanafl Madhhab, for all the ahadlth men¬ 
tioned under his descriptions (in books of narrators) revolve around sup¬ 
porting Imam Abu Hanlfah and insulting Imam al-Shafi‘l; amongst them 
is this one: a clear insult to the Shafi‘1 view, which approves the raising of 
the hands on going down into ruku' and rising from it—which is the truth 
without doubt—while obviously backing the Hanafl view which says that 


194 



Weakness of assorted narrations 


195 


this is makriih. This disgusting man was not even satisfied with the position 
of his Madhhab that raising the hands was makrith he even went to the ex¬ 
tent of inventing this hadith, in order to propagate amongst the people that 
raising the hands actually invalidates the prayer! 

Perhaps he also intended to support Makhul’s narration from Abu Hanl- 
fah that he said, “He who raises his hands during prayer, his prayer is ruined,” 
a narration which deceived Amir Katib al-Itqani, who compiled a treatise 
on the basis of it to argue the invalidation of the prayer by the raising of 
the hands! Similarly deceived was the one who trod his path and ruled that 
it was not permissible for Hanafls to pray behind Shafi'is because the latter 
raise their hands! While all along, this narration from Abu Hanlfah is utterly 
false, as Allamah Abu al-Hasanat al-LaknawI has verified it in al-Fawaidal- 
Bahiyyah fi Tardjim al-Hanafiyyab (pp. 116, 216-217). 

Shaykh ‘All al-Qarl quoted this hadith in al-Mawdii‘at and then said 
(p. 81), “This hadith was fabricated by Muhammad bin ‘Ukashah al-Kirmanl, 
may Allah disgrace him.” Tater (p. 129), he quoted Ibn al-Qayyim as saying, 
“It is fabricated.” 

This is contrary to what has been established (above) that the fabricator 
was al-HarawI; if it is proved, than perhaps one of them stole it from the 
other! 

We can see from all this, what not adhering to the Sunnah, and not au¬ 
thenticating narrations from the Prophet and the Imams, can result in! 

Note: About raising the hands on going into ruku and rising from it, 
many many ahadith have been narrated from the Prophet : they are ac¬ 
tually mutawdtir in the eyes of the scholars; in fact, raising the hands with 
every takbir is proven on his authority in many ahadith, whereas not raising 
the hands is not authentically related from him except once via ‘Abd Allah 
bin Mas‘ud but this is not suitable for putting into practice, for it is 


Weakness of assorted narrations 


196 


nafi (negatory). It is firmly established, in the eyes of the Hanafls and oth¬ 
ers, that the muthbit (affirmatory) takes precedence over the nafi (negatory); 
this is even when the affirmatory is on its own, let alone the case when it 
is a multitude of narrations, as in this issue! On the basis of this principle, 
and in the absence of anything contrary, this renders it binding on them to 
adopt the raising of the hands, and not to stick zealously to the Madhhab 
after the establishment of proof. However, it is a pity that only a handful 
of the earlier or later ones have adopted it, so much so that not raising the 
hands has become a landmark for them! 

Narration #569 

He who recites behind the Imam, his mouth is filled with fire. 

Mawdid (Fabricated). Ibn Tahir said—after quoting it in Tadbkirab al- 
Mawdii ‘at (p. 93)—“The isnad contains Ma’mun bin Ahmad al-HarawI, an 
utter liar who used to narrate fabrications.” More of his description is given 
in hadith in the following sub section. Ibn Hibban mentioned this hadith 
under his name in al-Du ‘afd (The Weak Narrators) and al-Dhahabl regarded 
it as one of his calamities! 

Some Hanafls have been deceived by this hadith, arguing on its basis that 
any recitation behind the Imam is totally hardm\ Abu al-Hasanat al-LaknawI 
said in al-Ta‘liqal-Mumajjid ‘aid Muwattd Muhammad (p. 99), “It was men¬ 
tioned by the author of al-Nihdyah and by others as marfu ‘ with the wording, 
‘there is a burning coal in his mouth,’ and it is totally baseless.” 

He had said before that, “In no sahib marfu ‘hadith is there a forbiddance 
of reciting al-Fdtihah behind the Imam; all that they quote as marfu ‘ regard¬ 
ing this is either baseless or not authentic,” and had then mentioned this 
hadith with both wordings as an example. 



Weakness of assorted narrations 


197 


The people of knowledge, both past and present, have differed regarding 
recitation behind the Imam, taking one of three views: 

i. That recitation in loud and quiet prayers is obligatory. 

ii. That silence in loud and quiet prayers is obligatory. 

iii. That there be recitation in quiet, but not in loud, prayers. 

This last view is the most balanced and closest to the truth, for in it, all the 
evidences can be accommodated such that none of them is rejected totally. It 
is the view of Malik and Ahmad, and has also been preferred after analysis by 
some Hanafis, including Abu al-Hasanat al-LaknawI in his aforementioned 
book. 

Narration #570 

There will be a man among my Ummah known as Muhammad bin 

Idris, who will be more harmful to my Ummah than Iblls, and there 

will be a man among my Ummah known as Abu Hanlfah, who will be 

the lamp of my Ummah. 

Mawdid (Fabricated). Ibn al-jawzl quoted it in al-Mawduat (1/457) via: 

Ma’mun bin Ahmad al-Salml, who said: Ahmad bin ‘Abd Allah al-Juway- 
barl narrated to us: ‘Abd Allah bin Mi‘dan al-Azadi informed us from Anas, 
as marju and then said, “Fabricated; invented by Ma’mun or by al-Juway- 
barl.” Al-Hakim mentioned in al-Madhkal that it was said to Ma’mun, “Do 
you not look to al-Shafi‘I and his followers?” So he said, “Ahmad bin ‘Abd 
Allah al-Juwaybarl narrated to us... etc. so it becomes evident that he is its 
fabricator.” 

The following addition occurs in Lisdn\ “Al-Hakim then said, ‘Anyone 
whom Allah has granted the least amount of intelligence would testify that a 
hadith such as this is a fabrication attributed to the Messenger of Allah |§J.’ ” 



Weakness of assorted narrations 


198 


The hadith does have other routes of narration, but these depend on 
liars and unknown reporters. Therefore, it is extremely bizarre that ‘Allamah 
al-‘Ayni should incline towards strengthening the hadith with those other 
routes, and that Shaykh al-Kawtharl should support him! However, it is no 
surprise from the latter, for he was notorious for being submerged in zeal 
for Imam Abu Hanlfah T| 4 , even if it entailed insulting other Imams; but 
it is very surprising from al-‘Ayni, for he was generally known to not go to 
such extremes. The opinion of these two has been refuted, with analysis of 
the other routes of narration referred to, in a unique way in ‘Allamah al- 
Mu'allami al-Yamanl’s valuable book, al-Tankil himd fi Ta’nib al-Kawthari 
min al-Abdtil (1/20, 446-449). 



Appendix F 


Analysis of the narrations regarding the saying 
of dmin by the Imam and the Congregation 

From: Silsilah al-Ahadith al-Da‘ifah (#951-#952) by Shaykh al-Albanl. 

Narration #951 

When he said dmin, those behind him would say dmin, such that there 

was a lot of noise in the mosque. 

There is no basis for the badith with this wording as far as we know. Ibn 
Hajr said in al-Talkbis al-Habir (p. 90), “I do not find it with this wording, 
but its meaning is related by Ibn Majah in the badith of Bishr bin Raff (i.e. 
badith #952).” He then said, 

Note: Ibn Salah said about this badith in his book al-Wasit, 

“This badith was quoted by al-Ghazzall with this wording just 
as Imam al-Haramayn cited it in his book al-Nihdyab, which 
is not authentic as being marfu ?’ Al-Shafi‘I transmitted it from 
the badith of ‘Ata who said, “I used to hear the Imams Ibn 
Zubayr and those who came after him all say Amin (loudly) 
until the mosque trembled.” Al-Nawawl said something sim¬ 
ilar and he added that this is incorrect from them both; and 


199 



The saying ofdmm by the Imam and the Congregation 


200 


it seems as he and Ibn Salah both intended this wording of 
the hadith to be correct. However, the context provided by Ibn 
Majah provides some meaning (to the hadith ) we mentioned 
earlier. 

The statements which have preceded establish that the context provided 
by Ibn Majah is the complete meaning and not just some part ofit. Therefore, 
if one thinks about the context, then either all of the meaning is contained 
in it or just a part. If we take just some parts of the hadith, it shows only the 
Imam should say Amin loudly, which is clear from the text. And if we take the 
entire context and meaning, it provides evidence that the congregation also 
said Amin loudly with the Imam as the wording of the hadith says, .and 
the mosque would shake with it.” Therefore, it is possible that the reason for 
the echoing of the Amin was due to the Messenger of Allah |§| saying it as 
the hadith is conclusive regarding this and it is also possible this was due to 
the congregation’s saying Am in coinciding with his. And this is the wording 
of the hadith of Ibn Majah. 

Narration #952 

When he recited “Not of those who received Your anger, nor of those 

who go astray,” he said dmin, such that those close to him in the first 

row could hear (and the mosque trembled with it). 

Da ‘if (Weak). Related by Ibn Majah (1/281) and Abu Dawud without 
the addition (1/148), both via: 

Bishr bin Raff from Abu ‘Abd Allah, son of the maternal uncle of (i.e. 
cousin of) Abu Hurayrah i%, from Abu Hurayrah d§g, from the Prophet 



The saying ofdmm by the Imam and the Congregation 


201 


This chain is weak. Al-Hafiz al-Zar‘ah ibn al-Traqi’s saying, “Its chain 
is good,” {Tarh al-Tathrih [2/268]) is not good and will be clarified with 
proceeding statements. 

Ibn Hajar said in al-Talkhis (p. 90), “Bishr bin Raff is weak; the cousin 
of Abu Hurayrah 41 a has been said to be unknown, but Ibn Hibban has 
declared him reliable.” 

Al-BusayrI said in al-Zawaid (56/1), “This is a weak isnad\ Abu ‘Abd 
Allah’s condition is not known; Bishr was declared weak by Ahmad, and Ibn 
Hibban said, ‘He narrated fabrications.’ ” What Ibn Hibban said was good 
when he concluded (1/179), “...as if he did this intentionally.” It was from 
the shortcomings of al-Shawkanl when he said about this hadith —after Majd 
ibn Taymlyyah transmits it with the wording of Abu Dawud and Ibn Majah 
(2/188)—“Al-Daraqutnl also transmitted it and he said, ‘The chain is hasan 
and al-Hakim said, ‘It is sahib according to the conditions of al-Bukharl and 
Muslim.’ And al-Bayhaql said, ‘It is hasan sahih! ” 

All of them transmitted the first part of the hadith with the wording, 
“When he finished reciting the Umm al-Qur’dn, he raised his voice and said 
Amin” and it does not contain the words, “.. .those close to him in the first 
row could hear it.” The wording of this narration is not in the narration of 
Ibn Majah; that the Amin said by the congregation coincided with his |§i 
Amin and that the mosque would shake. This shows the difference between 
the narrations and therefore it is not permissible to ascribe to the first narra¬ 
tion from the two except that exclusion from the other narrations becomes 
apparent. Furthermore, the wording in the narration is also weak as the nar¬ 
rator Ishaq bin Ibrahim bin al-‘Ala al-Zabidi — who is in all of the chains 
better known as Ibn Zabriq — is weak. Abu Hatim said, “Shaykh and there 
is no harm in him.” Ibn MaTn praised him with good, while al-Nasa’l said, 
“He is not trustworthy,” and Muhammad bin ‘Awf said, “I doubt that Ishaq 


The saying ofdmm by the Imam and the Congregation 


202 


bin Zabrlq used to lie.” 

However, the wording of this narration is correct and it has a supporting 
hadith from Wa’il bin Hujr, with an authentic chain. As for the wording of 
the first narration, then I do not know anything that supports it from the 
Sunnah except what al-Shafi‘I transmits in his Musnad (1/76): 

Muslim bin Khalid informed us from Ibn Jurayj from ‘Ata 
who said, “I used to hear the Imams...” and he mentioned Ibn 
Zubayr and those who came after him that “when they would 
say Amin, those behind them would also say Amin to the extent 
that the mosque shook (i.e. trembled).” 

Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajr remained silent about the hadith as has preceded and 
it has two defects. The first: The weakness of Muslim bin Khalid and he is 
known as al-Zanjl. Al-Hafiz Ibn Hajr said he was truthful but made many 
mistakes. The second: The ‘ananah of Ibn Jurayj, who was a mudallis and 
it is possible that he took the narration from Khalid bin Abi Anuwf who 
transmitted from ‘Ata with the wording, “I met 200 Companions of the 
Messenger of Allah |§| in this mosque (i.e. Masjid al-Haram) that when the 
Imam would say, ‘^UJI V } ,’ they would raise their voices and say Amin” 
and in another narration, “I heard the echo of their Amin!’ Transmitted 
by Ibn Hibban in al-Thiqdt {2I74) and al-Bayhaql (2/59) who has another 
narration. This Khalid in the chain, Ibn Abi Hatim has an entry for him 
in (1/2/355-356) [Translator’s Note: in al-Jarh wa al-Ta‘dil\ and he does 
not mention anything by the way of disparagement or praise. Ibn Hibban 
cites this report under his biographical entry in his al-Thiqdt. However, Ibn 
Hibban is well-known to be lenient in grading narrators to be trustworthy. 
Therefore, it is for this reason that I am not satisfied regarding the authentic¬ 
ity of this narration. This is because if Ibn Jurayj did take this from him, then 


The saying ofdmm by the Imam and the Congregation 


203 


it is only one chain of transmission and if this is not the case, then we do not 
know who Ibn Jurayj took it from. It seems that Imam al-Shafi‘1 himself was 
also not satisfied with the authenticity of this narration and holds a different 
view. He says in al-Umm (1/95), “So when the Imam finishes reciting Umm 
al-Qur’dn, he should sa y Amin while raising his voice so that the congrega¬ 
tion can follow him in that. When he says it, they say it within themselves 
but I do not like them saying it loudly.” If this report was authentic from 
the Companions according to al-Shafi‘I, he would not have liked to have 
opposed their action, in shd Allah. Therefore, the most correct view in this 
issue is the view of al-Shafi‘l; that only the Imam should say Amin loudly 
and not the congregation. Allah knows best. 

This hadith only gives a part of the meaning of the one before it, i.e. the 
saying of dmin by the Imam alone. As for the dmin of those behind, this 
could be the reason for the phrase “the mosque trembled with it (the sound),” 
but the hadith literally implies that the dmin of the Prophet |_ was the reason 
for this. 

Narration 

When he finished reciting the Mother of the Quran, he raised his voice 

and said dmin. 

Da‘if (Weak). Related by al-Daraqutni, al-Hakim, and al-Bayhaql. 

All the above sources contain Ishaq bin Ibrahim bin al-‘Ala al-Zubaydi, 
also known as Ibn Zibriq, who is weak: Abu Hatim said, “An old man, no 
harm in him;” Ibn Ma‘ln described him in good terms; al-Nasa’I said, “Not 
reliable;” Muhammad bin ‘Awf said, “I have no doubt that Ishaq bin Zi¬ 
briq used to lie.” However, this wording is correct in meaning, for it has a 
supporting hadith of Wa’il bin Hajar with a sahib sanad. 



The saying ofdmm by the Imam and the Congregation 


204 


(Since the text of this hadith does not imply the dmin of the congregation 
at all, it is incorrect to regard it as another version of hadith no. 2, as al- 
Shawkanl did.) 

The only support for no. 1 is what al-ShafiT related in his Mnsnad (1/76) 
via Muslim bin Khalid from Ibn Jurayj from ‘Ata, who said: 

Narration 

I used to hear the Imams: Ibn al-Zubayr and others after him would 
say dmin, and those behind would say dmin, until the mosque echoed. 

This has two defects: 

i. The weakness of Muslim bin Khalid al-Zanjl; Ibn Hajar said, “He was 
truthful, but made many errors.” 

ii. The \dnanah of Ibn Jurayj, who was a mudallis-, perhaps he actually 
took it from Khalid bin Abi Anuf, who narrated it from ‘Ata as fol¬ 
lows: 

Narration 

I came across two hundred Companions of the Messenger of Allah 
in this mosque (i.e. Masjid al-Haram, Makkah): when the Imam had 
said “Nor of those who go astray,” they raised their voices in dmin (in 
one narration: I heard the thundering sound of their dmin). 

Related by al-Bayhaql (2/59) and Ibn Hibban in al-Thiqdt (2/74); the 
alternative narration is from the former. 

This Khalid was described by Ibn Abi Hatim (1/2/355-366), but he did 
not include any authentication or disparagement. Ibn Hibban included him 
among the reliable narrators, but Ibn Hibban is well-known to be far from 




The saying ofdmm by the Imam and the Congregation 20 5 

rigorous in such cases, so I am not satisfied that this narration is authentic. 
This is because if Ibn Jurayj indeed took it from him, this constitutes only 
one debatable route; if not, we do not know from whom Ibn Jurayj took it. 
It seems that Imam al-Shafi‘I himself was not satisfied of the authenticity of 
this narration, for his position is contrary to it: he says in al-Umm (1/95), 
“So when the Imam completes reciting the Mother of the Book, he says dmin, 
raising his voice so that those behind may follow him: when he says it, they 
say it to themselves, but I do not like them saying it aloud;” Had the above 
narration from the Companions been authentic in al-ShafiTs view, he would 
not have opposed their action. 

Hence, the most correct opinion in this issue appears to be the madhhab 
of al-Shafi‘I: that the Imam, but not those following, should say dmin loudly. 
Allah knows best. 

But then, I saw that al-Bukharl mentioned the text (only) of the narration 
about Ibn al-Zubayr in his Sahih (i.e. in mn'allaq form), designating it with 
certainty. Ibn Hajar said in Fath al-Bdri (2/208), “The connecting isnad has 
been provided by Abd al-Razzaq from Ibn Jurayj from ‘Ata. He (i.e. Ibn 
Jurayj) said, ‘I said to him, “Did Ibn al-Zubayr say dmin at the end of the 
Mother of the Quran?” He said, “Yes, and those behind him also said dmin, 
until the mosque echoed.” He then said, “Verily, dmin is a supplication.” 
This is found in the Musannaf of‘Abd al-Razzaq (2640/2), and from this 
route, in Ibn Hazm’s al-Mnhalld (3/364). 

In this narration, Ibn Jurayj has clarified that he took the narration from 
‘Ata face-to-face, so we are assured of the absence of tadlis, and the narra¬ 
tion of Ibn al-Zubayr is established firmly. Similarly is proven from Abu 
Hurayrah i|§fe; Abu Rafi said: 



The saying ofdmm by the Imam and the Congregation 


20 6 


Narration 

Abu Hurayrah used to call to prayer for Marwan bin al-Hakam, stip¬ 
ulating that the latter would not get to “Nor of those who go astray” 
unless he knew that Abu Hurayrah had entered the row. So when Mar- 
wan said “Nor of those who go astray,” Abu Hurayrah would say dmin, 
prolonging it. He also said, “When the dmin of those on the earth co¬ 
incides with the dmin of those in the heaven, they are forgiven.” 

Related by al-Bayhaql (2/59); its isnad is sahih. 

Hence, since nothing is established from any of the Companions other 
than Abu Hurayrah and Ibn al-Zubayr j^s, contrary to their dmin aloud, 
this must be accepted. Presently, I know of no narration opposing this. Allah 
knows best. 



Appendix G 


The two rak ‘ahs after Witr 

From: Silsilab al-Ahadub al-Sahihab (#1993) by Shaykh al-Albanl. 

i. The Messenger of Allah said, “Make the last of your prayer at night 

odd ( witr).” Related by al-Bukharl and Muslim. 

ii. Abu Salamah asked ‘A’ishah about the prayer of the Messenger 
of Allah §§|. She said, “He performed thirteen rak'abs (in the night 
prayer): he observed eight rak'ahs and would then observe Witr and 
then observe two rak'ahs sitting, and when he wanted to bow, he stood 
up and then bowed down, and then observed two mk‘abs in between 
the adhan and iqdmah of the Dawn Prayer.” Related by Muslim. 

iii. Thawbansaid, “We were on a journey with the Messenger of Allah §§, 
when he said, ‘Truly, this journey is an exertion and a burden, so when 
each of you has prayed Witr , he should perform two mk‘abs\ if he 
wakes up (then well and good), otherwise these two will be (the night 
prayer) for him.’ ” Related by al-Dariml (1/374), Ibn Khuzaymah in 
his Sahib (2/159/1103), and Ibn Hibban (683) from various routes 
going back to: Ibn Wahb, who said, “Muawiyah bin Salih narrated 
to me from Shurayh bin ‘Ubayd from ‘Abd al-Rahman bin Jubayr bin 
Nufayr from his father from Thawban, who said...” 


207 


The two rak ‘ahs after Witr 


208 


Ibn Wahb was corroborated by ‘Abd Allah bin Salih, who said, “Mu‘awi- 
yah bin Salih narrated to us...etc.” related by al-Daraqutnl (p. 177) and 
al-Tabaranl in al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir (1410). ‘Abd Allah bin Salih is a shaykh 
of al-Bukharl, so he can be used as evidence in supporting others’ narrations. 

This hadith is used as evidence by Imam Ibn Khuzaymah, “that prayer 
after Witr is allowed to whoever wants to pray after it, and that the two 
rak'ahs which the Prophet ■ used to pray after Witr were not exclusively 
for him over his Ummah, for he has ordered us to pray two rak'ahs after 
Witr, an order of recommendation and preference, not one of obligation 
and compulsion.” 

Hence, it is clear to us from this hadith (because of his general order to 
his Ummah) that the two rak'ahs after Witr were not exclusively for him; 
it seems that the purpose of his command to make the last prayer at night 
odd was to prevent neglect of the one odd rak'ah, so this objective is not 
contradicted by the two rak 'ahs after it, as established in his practice and his 
command. Allah knows best. 


Appendix H 


The weakness of narrations mentioning 
wiping the face with hands after du ‘a 

From Irwd al-Ghalil (2/178-182) by Shaykh al-Albanl. 

Narration #43 3 

The Prophet A, when he raised his hands in du ‘d, he would not put 

them down until he had wiped his face with them. 

Daif (Weak). Reported by al-Tirmidhl (2/244) and Ibn ‘Asakir (7/12/2) 
via: Hammad bin ‘Isa al-Juhanl from Hanzalah bin Abi Sufyan al-Jamhi 
from Salim ibn ‘Abd Allah from his father from ‘Umar bin al-Khattab, who 
said:... 

Al-Tirmidhl said after it, “This is a sahib gharib hadith. We only know it 
as a hadith of Hammad bin ‘Isa, for he is alone in reporting it; he has few 
ahddith , but the people have reported from him.” 

However, this reporter is weak, as in al-Taqrib of Ibn Hajr, who says about 
him in al-Tahdhib : 

Ibn Main said, “A good shaykhh Abu Hatim said, “Weak in 
hadith Abu Dawud said, “Weak, he reports munkar ahddith 
al-Hakim and al-Naqqash said, “He reports fabricated ahddith 


209 



Narrations mentioning wiping the face with hands after du \a 


210 


from Ibn Jurayj and Ja‘far al-Sadiq.” He is declared to be weak 
by al-Daraqutnl. Ibn Hibban said, “He reports things which are 
the wrong way round on the authority of Ibn Jurayj and ‘Abd 
al-‘AzIz bin ‘Umar bin ‘Abd al-‘Az!z, such that it seems to those 
whose field this is that it is deliberate; it is not permissible to 
use him as proof.” Ibn Makula said, “They declare his ahadith 
to be weak.” 

Hence, the like of this reporter is very weak, so his ahadith cannot be 
raised to the level of hasan, let alone sahih\ 

A similar hadith is: 

Narration 

When the Prophet *§§ did dud and raised his hands, he would wipe his 
face with his hands. 

Da'if (Weak). Abu Dawud (1492) via Ibn Lahfah from Hafs bin Hashim 
bin ‘Utbah bin Abi Waqqas from al-Sa’ib ibn Yazid from his father. 

This is a weak sanad due to Hafs ibn Hashim being unknown and the 
weakness of Ibn Tahfah (cf. al-Taqrib al-Tahdhib). 

This hadith cannot be strengthened by the two routes of narration together 
due to the severity in weakness of the first one, which you have seen. 

Narration #434 

When you call upon Allah, then supplicate with the palms of your 
hands, and do not supplicate with their backs, and when you finish, 
wipe your face with them. 

Da'if (Weak). Related by Ibn Majah (1181, 3866), Ibn Nasr in Qiydm 
al-Layl (p. 137), al-Tabaranl in al-Mu‘jam al-Kabir (3/98/1), and al-Hakim 




Narrations mentioning wiping the face with hands after du \a 


211 


(1/536), from Salih bin Hassan from Muhammad bin Ka‘b from Ibn ‘Abbas 
as marfu \ 

This is a weak sanad due to Ibn Hassan, who is munkar in hadith , as 
al-Bukharl said; al-Nasa I said, “He is abandoned in hadith ;” Ibn Hibban 
said, “He used to have female singers and listen to music, and he used to 
narrate fabricated reports on the authority of trustworthy narrators;” Ibn 
Abi Hatim said in Kitdb al-‘Ilal (2/351), “I asked my father (i.e. Abu Hatim 
al-RazI) about this hadith, to which he said: ‘Munkar’ ” 

Ibn Hassan has been backed up by ‘Isa bin Maymun, who also reported it 
from Muhammad bin Ka‘b, as related by Ibn Nasr. However, this does not 
alter anything, since Ibn Maymun is similarly weak: Ibn Hibban said, “He 
reports ahadith, all of which are fabricated;” al-Nasa’I said, “Not reliable.” 

This hadith of Ibn ‘Abbas is also related by Abu Dawud (1485), and from 
him al-Bayhaql (2/212), via: ‘Abd al-Malik bin Muhammad ibn Ayman 
from ‘Abd Allah bin Ya'qub bin Ishaq from someone who narrated to him 
from Muhammad bin Ka‘b, the wording being: 

Narration 

Do not cover the walls. He who looks into the letter of his brother 
without his permission, verily he looks into the Fire. Ask Allah with 
the palms of your hands, and do not ask him with their backs, and 
when you finish, wipe your faces with them. 

This is a vitaksanad-. ‘Abd al-Malik is declared weak by Abu Dawud; it also 
contain the shaykh of‘Abd Allah bin Ya‘qub who is unnamed, and therefore 
unknown—it is possible that he may be Ibn Hassan or Ibn Maymun, both 
of whom are mentioned above. 

The hadith is also transmitted by al-Hakim (4/270) via: Muhammad bin 
Mu'awiyah, who said that Masadif bin Ziyad al-Madlnl narrated to him 



Narrations mentioning wiping the face with hands after du \a 


212 


that he heard it from Muhammad bin Ka‘b al-QurazI. Al-DhahabI followed 
this up by pointing out that Ibn Mu'awiyah was declared to be a liar by 
al-Daraqutnl, so the hadith is falsified. 

Abu Dawud said about this hadith, “This hadith has been narrated via 
more than one route on the authority of Muhammad bin Ka‘b; all of them 
are feeble.” 

Raising the hands on doing Qunut for a calamity is established from the 
Messenger of Allah |§| in his supplication against the polytheists who killed 
seventy reciters—transmitted by Imam Ahmad (3/137) and al-Tabaranl in 
al-Miijam al-Saghir (p. 111) as the hadith of Anas with a sahib sanad. Similar 
is proved from ‘Umar and others in the Qunut of Witr prayer. However, since 
wiping the face after Da ‘a al-Qumit is not quoted at all from the Prophet 
i§, nor from any of his Companions, it is an innovation without doubt. 

As for wiping the face after du ‘a outside of prayer, there are only these 
two ahadith, it is not correct to say that they mutually strengthen each other 
to the rank of hasan, as al-ManawI did, due to the severity of the weakness 
found in their routes of narration. This is why Imam al-NawawI said in al- 
Majmu, “It is not recommended,” endorsing Ibn ‘Abd al-Salam, who said, 
“Only an ignorant person does it.” 

The view that wiping the face after du ‘ a is not prescribed is strengthened 
by the fact that there are many authentic ahadith about raising the hands in 
supplication, and in none of them is there a mention of wiping the face; this 
shows, in-shd-Alldh, that it is unacceptable and not prescribed. 

[If] Ibn Ma‘In speaks favorably about a narrator, whereas the rest of the 
scholars declare him to be weak, then the statement of Ibn Ma‘In is disre¬ 
garded, the reason being that he was known for his strictness and severity in 
criticism: weak narrators would be very careful not to reveal their weakness 
before him; he would therefore pass judgment accordingly. This explains 


Narrations mentioning wiping the face with hands after da \a 


213 


why he is alone in authenticating the narrator. 



Appendix I 


Four places of prayer in Masjid al-Haram 


The following is an excerpt (pp. 109-10) from The Story of a Pilgrimage to 
Hijaz (Calcutta: Thacker, Spink & Co, 1909) by Her Highness, the Nawab 
Sultan Jahan Begum (i.e. Sultan Kaikhusrau Jahan Begum), Ruler of Bhopal 
(1858-1930). 



Musalla Hanafi (p. 109). 


2I 4 






Four places of prayer in Masjid al-Hardm 


215 


Maqam Musalla Hanafi 

Inside the Haram is a Musalla (place of prayer) surmounted by two brass 
spires where the Imam of the Hanafis prays with those of his sect. The ma¬ 
jority of the inhabitants of India and Turkistan are Hanafis. 

Maqam Musalla ShafiT 

This Musalla, which stands close to the well of Zamzam, has a single brass 
spire. It is set apart for the worship of the ShafiTs, the sect to which most 
Arabs belong. 

Maqam Musalla Malikl 

At this Musalla, which has one brass spire, the Imam of te Malikls stands to 
pray. The people of the Western countries are for the most parts [sic] Malikls. 

Maqam Musalla Hanball 

The Hanballs’ Musalla has one brass spire. Most Arabs are followers of the 
Hanball school. The four Musallas above belong to the Sunnis; The Shfas 
and the Kharijis have no concern with them. 


Four places of prayer in Masjid al-Hardm 


216 


4 

• j iiS ^l h -n-l -T -- - •; r - ■ - 

ilVi r- ,+ c ' ■ 


// 


T 


Masjid al-Haram al-Sharlf (p. 44). 




Appendix ] 


Addendum 

All that has been mentioned of the description of the Prophet’s prayer '■ 
applies equally to men and women, for there is nothing in the Sunnah to ne¬ 
cessitate the exception of women from any of these descriptions; in fact, the 
generality of his ; statement, “Pray as you have seen me praying,” includes 
women. 

This is the view of Ibrahim al-Nakha‘I, who said, “A woman’s actions in the 
prayer are the same as a man’s”—transmitted by Ibn Abl Shaybah (1/75/2), 
with a sahib sanad from him. 

Also, al-Bukharl reported in al-Tarikh al-Saghir (p. 95) with a sahih sanad 
from Umm al-Darda, “that she used to sit in her prayer just as a man sits, 
and she was a woman of understanding.” 

The hadith about the indimam (tucking up) of a woman in prostration, 
and that she is in that regard not like a man, is mnrsal and not authentic. 
Abu Dawud transmitted it in al-Mardsil on the authority of Yazld ibn Abl 
Habib. 

As for what Imam Ahmad has reported, as in his son, ‘Abd Allah’s, Masa ’il, 
from Ibn ‘Umar that he used to instruct his wives to sit cross-legged in 
prayer, its sanad is not authentic, for it contains ‘Abd Allah ibn ‘Umar al- 
‘Amrl, who is a da‘if (weak) narrator. 


217 


1. al-Fatihah 


Quran Surah List 

C/3 


2. al-Baqarah 

3. Al ‘Imran 

4. al-Nisa 

5. al-Maidah 

6. al-Anam 

7. al-A‘raf 

8. al-Anfal 

9. al-Tawbah 

10. Yunus 

11. Hud 

12. Yusuf 

13. al-Ra‘ad 

14. Ibrahim 

15. al-Hijr 

16. al-Nahl 

17. al-Isra 

18. al-Kahf 

19. Maryam 

20. Ta-Ha 

21. al-Anbiya 

22. al-Hajj 

23. al-Mu’minun 

24. al-Nur 

25. al-Furqan 

26. al-Shu‘ara 

27. al-Naml 


30. al-Rum 

31. Luqman 

32. al-Sajdah 

33. al-Ahzab 

34. Saba 

35. Fatir 

36. Ya Sin 

37. al-Saffat 

38. Sad 

39. Al-Zumar 

40. Ghafir 

41. Fussilat 

42. al-Shura 

43. al-Zukhruf 

44. al-Dukhan 

45. al-Jathiyah 

46. al-Ahqaf 

47. Muhammad 

48. al-Fath 

49. al-Hujurat 

50. Qaf 

51. al-Dhariyat 

52. al-Tur 

53. al-Najm 

54. al-Qamar 

55. al-Rahman 

56. al-Waqiyah 

57. al-Hadid 

58. al-Mujadalah 


59. al-Hashr 

60. al-Mumtahinah 

61. al-Saff 

62. al-Jumu‘ah 

63. al-Munafiqun 

64. al-Taghabun 

65. al-Talaq 

66. al-Tahrim 

67. al-Mulk 

68. al-Qalam 

69. al-Haqqah 

70. al-Maarij 

71. Nuh 

72. al-Jinn 

73. al-Muzzammil 

74. al-Muddaththir 

75. al-Qiyamah 

76. al-Insan 

77. al-Mursalat 

78. al-Naba 

79. al-Naziat 

80. ‘Abasa 

81. al-TakwIr 

82. al-Infitar 

83. al-Mutaffifin 

84. al-Inshiqaq 

85. al-Buruj 

86. al-Tariq 

87. al-A‘la 


88. al-Ghashiyah 

89. al-Fajr 

90. al-Balad 

91. al-Shams 

92. al-Layl 

93. al-Duha 

94. al-Sharh 

95. al-Tin 

96. al-Alaq 

97. al-Qadr 

98. al-Bayyinah 

99. al-Zalzalah 

100. al-‘Adiyat 

101. al-Qari‘ah 

102. al-Takathur 

103. al-Asr 

104. al-Humazah 

105. al-Fil 

106. Quraysh 

107. al-Ma un 

108. al-Kawthar 

109. al-Kafirun 

110. al-Nasr 

111. al-Masad 

112. al-Ikhlas 

113. al-Falaq 


28. Qasas 

29. al-‘Ankabut 


114. al-Nas 